
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73280 ***





  [Illustration:

    _J.X.Fabre. pinx._          _Emery Walker Ptr.sc._

  _Henry Richard, third Lord Holland_

  _1796_]




                              THE JOURNAL

                                  OF

                        ELIZABETH LADY HOLLAND

                              (1791–1811)


                               EDITED BY
                         THE EARL OF ILCHESTER


                           _WITH PORTRAITS_


                            IN TWO VOLUMES

                          VOL. II. 1799–1811


                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                      39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
                    NEW YORK, BOMBAY, AND CALCUTTA
                                 1908

                          All rights reserved




                            LIST OF PLATES

                             TO VOLUME II.


    HENRY RICHARD, THIRD LORD HOLLAND, 1796             _Frontispiece_
    _From a painting by F. X. Fabre._

    HENRIETTA, THIRD COUNTESS OF BESSBOROUGH        _To face p._    96
    _From a painting by Louis Gauffier._

    JOHN, VISCOUNT BORINGDON (AFTERWARDS EARL OF
      MORLEY), 1798                                        „         190
    _From a painting by J. Hoppner._




                         JOURNAL OF ELIZABETH

                             LADY HOLLAND


_26th July, 1799._--Left H. H. this morning to make a tour into
Wales and the west of England. Ld. H. went to dine at St. Anne’s, and
Drew, Charles, and myself came to this place (General Fitzpatrick’s,
Sunninghill) to meet him. On Saturday, ye 27th, we arrived to dinner
at Oxford. Close by the General’s, upon Ascot Heath, there is a camp.
The cavalry were watered whilst we went on the road, a pretty incident;
their brilliant coats contrasted with the dusky brown of the heath,
and produced a very lively effect. A cross road to Henley; just as
we entered the town we passed under Park Place, a late purchase of
Ld. Malmesbury’s. Somewhere near Henley is the highest ground south
of Trent. On ye 28th went from Oxford, by Chapel House, to Warwick.
I could not help laughing at the _event_ of our going, because
the subject of seeing the Castle without being obliged by urgent
solicitations to make a long visit there (as Ld. H. was sure we should
be very much pressed) had occupied his thoughts for many hours. Ld.
H. had written letters to Ly. W. and Mrs. Smith, so calculated as to
make a refusal of the pressing invitations (which he dreaded having)
quite civil; but we need not have been embarrassed. So far from being
solicited to stay, the whole family flew to their fortresses in some
battlemented towers, gave out that they were walking, and shunned us.
It was a most fortunate escape to me, tho’ I believe Ld. H. was vexed
at the impertinence of the proceeding. The Castle is magnificent,
decorated with ornaments appropriate to the building, and in the very
best taste possible. His taste in virtu is better than in breeding, as
he manifested a gross deficiency of that quality to us.

From thence we went across a very moderate road to Kenilworth; by
the remains of the castle it appears to have far exceeded Warwick in
splendour and extent.

On ye 29th we went through Birmingham. Having seen it last year we
did not stop, but went straight on to the Leasowes, a spot rendered
celebrated by Shenstone; it is very unworthy of the praise he bestowed
upon it, and is now fallen into decay. About three miles further is
Hagley; the park is very beautiful, the house simple. The comfortless
taste prevalent in England of placing the house in a lawn where sheep
and cattle feed close to the windows, instead of ornamental gardens,
gives rather a disconsolate appearance to it; otherwise it is almost as
desirable as a country residence (a bad thing at best) can be. It was
built by the _good_ Ld. Lyttelton,[1] as he is generally called to
distinguish him from his son, who, in contradistinction, is termed the
_bad_. His much-loved wife, whom he celebrates under the name of
Lucy, is buried in the church. It destroys the pathos excited by his
elegy, if one recollects that within two years of her death he married
a fat, vulgar, rich widow, for her wealth.

[Sidenote: IRON BRIDGES]

Went thro’ Bridgenorth, situated picturesquely upon the Severn, which,
by-the-bye, is a yellow, muddy stream flowing with some rapidity, its
only beauty. From thence we went to Coalbrookdale to sleep. There is
the first iron bridge that was constructed; it is more curious from its
novelty and use than beautiful. I deprecate their becoming general, as
they are far inferior in point of beauty to those of stone; the dull
black of the iron assorts ill with limpid streams and verdant banks,
whereas on the contrary nothing can offer a more beautiful object than
a stone bridge of well-turned arches. The inhabitants are chiefly
quakers. During the American war they were offered a high gratification
if they would cast cannon; they replied that they worked for the
benefit of mankind, and not for their destruction, and peremptorily
refused. It is an increasing place.

On Tuesday, 30th, got to Shrewsbury, a place for ever distinguished
by the fall of the gallant Percy. One of the most admirable of
Shakespeare’s plays commemorates this event. What can be better than
the scene between the Triumvirate partitioning out the spoils of
Britain, the impetuosity of Hotspur, and the arrogant credulity of
Glendower? The crafty Worcester is a well-drawn character.

    Passing Llanrwst, Conway, and Bangor they reached Carnarvon
    on August 3rd.

_4th August. Sunday._--We left Carnarvon to go to Welsh Pool. From
that place to Tan y Bwlch the road is over a high mountain. Snowdon in
sight to our left.

Before Tan y Bwlch we came to Pont y Aberglassen, a remarkable salmon
leap; Ld. H. screamed with delight at the sight of the salmons leaping
up. It is a pretty sight. Myself, I could have looked at them with
delight for an hour or two. At Tan y Bwlch, a small solitary inn,
we found every room occupied. The Judges were there. The civility of
some gentlemen enabled us to be under cover in a decent room whilst
we dined, but the house was so full that we were compelled to go on
nineteen miles at half-past seven, a mountainous road and a stormy
night, to Dolgelly; I wonder how we achieved it amidst the torrents
and precipices safely. The weather was so bad the next day that we saw
nothing.

_6th August._--This morning, set off from M----; such a deluge
of rain that we saw nothing to our right or left. To-night we are at
Welsh Pool, so disgusted with the roads and climate that we have some
thoughts of giving up doing Aberystwith. The beauties of Wales are very
inferior both to those of Scotland and Cumberland. The mts. are not so
lofty, the torrents are small and noiseless, no cascades: in short, the
old castles are alone worthy of notice. The country generally is thinly
inhabited; the postillions are chiefly boys, their men being either in
the army or employed in the navy. The Evil visibly afflicts a large
portion of the people.

On ye 7th of August we had a day very unusual; it did not rain. We
drove to Powys Castle, which is about a mile from Welsh Pool. It is
finely situated upon an eminence that commands the country around; the
place is neglected and the house is rambling and comfortless. In the
park is a fathomless pool, which gives name to the adjacent town. We
were obliged to stay the whole of the 7th, as horses were not to be
had. In the eve. Ld. H. and I had a very snug walk again to the castle.

[Sidenote: WELSH SCENERY]

On the 8th we set off for Aberystwith, and as the same horses were to
carry us great part of the way we stopped to dine at Newtown, the road
to which was extremely pleasing. Round hills covered to their summits
with thick wood, and a verdant vale with pretty rivers and cattle
grazing; it might have made a good study for quiet home views. We
crossed a rapid river without a bridge.

_Tuesday, 13th._--Left Aberystwith. We intended originally to have
gone to Cardigan, Haverfordwest, etc., but the judges were upon that
circuit, the roads bad, and the weather wretched. On that night we
slept at Lampeter, close upon a rapid river in which Ld. H. fished. The
eve. was tolerably fine. Drew and I walked about the environs.

_14th._--It had rained all night, and the rivers were so swelled
that they were deep to pass through; we went thro’ several and arrived
at Carmarthen to dine. Very heavy rain the whole day. Poor little
Charles was unwell, and we decided upon giving up Tenby.

On 15th heavy rain. After crossing ye Towy we looked back upon the
town, which appeared prettily situated, but the weather was so bad it
was impossible to see any object. The inhabitants were not surprised at
the infamy of the weather; they said it was nothing unusual.

Finding no horses at Neath, we were compelled to remain. We walked
to see the ruins of a small castle; the castle is not remarkable
except for the beauty of its situation, and probably was raised by
some of those Norman Barons who followed the fortunes of Fitzhamon,
the conqueror of Glamorganshire. The inn is kept by an Italian, who,
tho’ he left the happy climate in which he was born at nine years old,
yet retains enough of national _tournure_ to be known amongst a
multitude of red-faced ale-drinkers as an alien. There is an archness,
not to say roguery, which, such as it is, is a thousand times better
than the stupidity and sulkiness and _dubious honesty_ of the
British countenance in common life.

On ye 17th we passed thro’ Margam, a possession of Mr. Talbot’s. There
in his park are the beautiful remains of the Priory, about which I must
look in Grove and Camden. He pulled down the mansion, but has built a
magnificent greenhouse for the preservation of some orange-trees which
belonged to William III.[2] The architecture is Grecian, which, close
to a fine Gothic edifice, denotes more his adherence to the fashion of
the times than his judgment in conceiving an appropriate decoration,
as the two styles clash and diminish the beauty of both. Not that I
am an enthusiastic admirer of Grecian architecture in any way but
in a temple. There, indeed, the fine column, its slim shaft, rich
architrave, cornice, and volute, surmounted with a graceful pediment,
create a species of beauty which no other can. Indeed the circular
arch, as in the Pont de Garde, where they form a bridge and aqueduct
by several tiers one above the other, is very grand; otherwise, in
vast works, I like the Gothic architecture, which, to use an affected
phrase, is more _impressive_ in lofty structures. Mr. Talbot
married a cousin of Ld. H.’s, a daughter of Lord Ilchester’s.[3] It
was a strange match, she about sixteen, he sixty; as yet, however, the
disproportion has not affected their felicity. They live happily; a
good deal in the country.

[Sidenote: CARDIFF]

Arrived at Cardiff after dark. Received a note from Ly. Plymouth[4]
to tell me she was there; came the next morning, 18th, to breakfast.
She is scampering upon a blood horse, followed by an attorney, over
her son’s estates, settling his affairs. She complains of having found
everybody formerly employed rogues, from whence one may presume she
has fallen into the hands of some very great one. The Castle is very
handsome; in the area Ld. Bute has built a modern castellated house,
preserving in the centre one or two of the old towers.

_19th._--Fortunately, a fine day. Dear Charles was so unwell that
Drew wished him to have a day’s rest. Went over a very rough road to
Tintern Abbey, a delicious ruin, situated upon the banks of the Wye.
The church is almost entire; all the external walls are up and one
of the side aisles; roof off, of course. The architecture is not so
light and pleasing as Fountains Abbey, and of the monastery there are
scarcely any remains. They show a tomb and effigy of a warrior whom
they call Strongbow, Earl of Clare, who married Eva, the daughter of an
Irish King, and became himself King of Leinster, and obtained for Henry
II. the sovereignty of Ireland. In the eve. we had a charming walk upon
the Wye and saw the castle, a fine ruin, celebrated for holding out
against Cromwell, defended by Kemyss and Morgan. The former was cut to
pieces in the inner court. Upon the Restoration one of the regicides
was confined for 25 years in a chamber we saw. Southey wrote some
pretty lines enough on him.

    The party reached Ross on the 20th, having come through
    Chepstow and Monmouth.

_21st._--Went to the churchyard, from whence there is a celebrated
view, which, however, I think little of; the walk in it is shady and
pretty. 21st, came through Hereford to Foxley. At Hereford D. of
Norfolk insisted upon our giving him one day. 22nd, 23rd, stayed at
Foxley. The General was there. 24th, went to Ld. Oxford’s[5] at Eywood.
Charles unwell, and left at Foxley with Drew. 25th, stayed at Eywood.
26th, I returned alone to see Charles, and joined the whole party at
Downton Castle, Mr. Knight’s,[6] in the eve. late. 27th, returned to
Foxley. 28th, came to this place, Holme Court, the D. of Norfolk’s.
Stayed yesterday, and go away to-day, 30th.

[Sidenote: LADY OXFORD]

Ly. O. has lost her vivacity and beauty. She is in a deplorable state
of spirits, proceeding, I fancy, from an enthusiastic, romantic
admiration of Sr. Francis’s ideal perfections. She fancies herself
a victim of sensibility, and is really so drooping that I should
scarcely be surprised if she perished from imagining grief. Mr. Knight
encourages her in those _bursts_ of sensibility; he compares
her tears to April showers that sprinkle and revive the freshness of
the violet. Be the cause what it may, her beauty is impaired; her
eyes, which were always full and prominent, now from thinness start
out. It is also probable that her languor may arise from having
lost the relish which the novelty gave of being a great lady. She
appears from an affectation of _naïveté_ weaker than she is; in
a whining, monotonous, childish tone she uses fine phrases for common
conversation. She said to Ld. H. upon the Slave Trade, ‘I am always for
justice and humanity, ar’n’t you?’ And to the General: ‘In case of a
revolution, you, of course, would take the side of the people against
the King, would not you?’ The house is comfortable, and they live with
a degree of splendour they are unequal to, as he has ruined himself by
his ostentation and her total ignorance of the value of money.

Mr. Knight wrote a famous work upon the traces still to be found in
Italy of a primitive worship. He has assembled a large collection of
these symbols in bronze, marble, etc. He is a passionate admirer of
the ancients, and studies in nature antique forms and contours. Ly.
Hamilton was his favourite; she absent, the admiration is transferred
to Ly. O. He is a middle-aged man, and has a large fortune. His
pursuits are classical even to pedantry. He has made a good house and
fine grounds, and lives with a degree of luxurious _recherche_.

The Duke of Norfolk[7] is an extraordinary instance of the
impossibility of _situation_ being sufficient to secure happiness:
he, however, finds in his own good temper an antidote to all the
vexations of his life. He has all that rank, dignity, and wealth can
give; he married a beautiful woman whose person he liked, possessed
of 15,000_l._ pr. anm. About eight years after she became mad,
and from being intestate her immense possessions escheat to the Crown,
there being no male heir to the Scudamores. It appears to be a hardship
that the laws afford no relief to a person united to one insane, as no
pretext can be more valid towards the dissolution of a marriage than an
obstacle of that nature that impedes the fulfilling of every function
belonging to the institution. He maintains with solid magnificence
the splendour of his rank; everything about him bespeaks wealth and
luxurious comfort. His servants are old domestics, fat, sleek, and
happy; his table is profuse and exquisite. His taste is bad; he loves
society, but has no selection, and swallows wine for quantity, not
quality: he is gross in everything. The Dss.’s madness has taken a
sombre, _farouche_ turn; she hates all mankind. The clergyman
during a lucid interval advised her to read religious books, supplied
her with some, and mingled his advice with pious exhortations. She
acquiesced, and took the books. A few days after she returned them
with scorn, saying, ‘I wish I could believe your d----d trumpery, as I
should then be certain two-thirds of mankind would roast in H----! It
was curious that in the Gospels she could find matter to gratify her
malignity. The Duke behaves uncommonly well to her.

[Sidenote: DR. INGENHOUSZ]

Mrs. Clive, Ly. Plymouth’s sister, went there to meet me. She is a
shrewd, sensible woman. Her husband is a Jacobin of the worst sort,
envy actuating all his equalising principles.[8] Wm. Scott, Ly. O.’s
brother, another Jacobin, was there: he is merry and good-humoured,
and tho’ a zealous disciple of Horne Tooke’s a few good briefs to get
him a _pied à terre_ will cure him of his democracy. I knew him
many years ago at Nice. Capt. Morris,[9] the famous singer of his own
witty songs, entertained us with some of them; he is drunken and dull,
and since the death of a favourite son, has renounced singing any of
his _light_ songs. He made a superstitious vow to God Almighty
that he would not.

We slept at Gloucester on the 30th. On ye 31st passed through pretty
Rodborough Vale, and Badminton Park, not a fine place, tho’ large, and
arrived here, Bowood, 31st August, Saturday. Found Ld. Lansdown in
high good humour and cordiality with me, and in very good health and
spirits. The Smiths were just come from Warwick. Mr. Dumont is here,
and two or three other indifferent people. Poor old Ingenhousz is dying
rapidly. He is shrunk to a skeleton. Ld. L. with great humanity and
feeling affords him an asylum, which his other friends were averse to,
as the beholding of a dying man is a painful spectacle. He talks with
intrepidity of death, but, _hélas!_ where can the courage come
from? The subject is a painful one.

Dumont and I walked every morning, that is to say, the three I stayed,
in ye garden: his conversation is always amusing and instructive. We
talked over books that we each liked, especially Bonnet’s beautiful
work, _Contemplation de la nature_, which contains many interesting
expositions of the wonderful economy of nature in the structure of
plants and animals. Had he not too frequently allowed his imagination
to run off with him when he turns to the attributes of the divinity,
he would tire less, but his apostrophes which aim at sublimity are
generally incomprehensible and bombast.

Whilst I have been travelling I have not been idle in the way of
reading; we have read already ye first seven volumes of Henry’s
_History of England_. It is written upon a more extensive plan
than that suggested by Voltaire and partly adopted by Hume.

Of public affairs the changes have been so varied and rapid that it
is difficult to recollect the exact position of things. Bonaparte was
repulsed from before Acre, and obliged to return with a diminished and
dispirited army into Egypt. The circumstance the most humiliating is
that his great name should be coupled with that of the bullying bluster
of that charlatan, Sr. Sidney Smith, who has obtained the command of
some marines and gun-boats against him in Syria. How fickle is the
glory of a hero! That ‘... name at which mankind grew pale’ is now lost
in obscurity, and the events in the East, which occupied and tortured
the breast of every politician in Europe, are now so overlooked that
barely are they discussed in the survey of politics at present.

[Sidenote: STATE OF NAPLES]

In Italy Suwarrow and ye Austrians have driven out the French; the
Cis-Alpine district is returning to the dominion of its former
possessors; dear, pretty Florence is restored to its mild sovereign.
Lord Nelson has brought back the fugitive monarch to his capital, and
Naples now exhibits a scene of revenge, more bloody than the Sicilian
Vespers.[10] The hearts of Frenchmen are brought as trophies to a
cruel people, who crouched in servile subjection whilst they were too
abject to fight their own cause. Ly. Hamilton has not been remiss in
adding her quota to the barbarity which enflames every breast. Rome is
yet without its Pontiff, and for the happiness of a large portion of
the natives of those happy climates it is to be hoped will for ever
so remain, as no one can wish to see the restoration of a government
founded upon the superstitions of mankind, and burthensome in itself.

An expedition into Holland for the restoration of the Stadtholder has
just been undertaken.[11] It commenced ill; a fort was taken with
the loss of some officers and five hundred men. Since that the Dutch
fleet has surrendered, whether voluntarily or by the treachery of
its officers is yet a secret. The Duke of York is to go and take the
command. I don’t know how his presence will inspire courage to those
troops he absconded with so hastily but a few years back. The expense
is said to be so enormous that the income tax, which, by-ye-bye, has
fallen short of the calculation, will go to take a fifth, instead of a
tenth, of our incomes in future.

Left Bowood, Tuesday, ye 3rd; passed through a richly cultivated,
well-built, and populous vale to Wincanton. Passed thro’ Longleat
and Stourton; slept at the first town, and arrived here, Sherborne
Castle, on Wednesday. It is an old Gothic mansion; the _corps de
logis_ was built by Sir Walter Raleigh, who, if one may judge from
oral tradition, seemed attached to the spot, as there is a venerable
grove planted by his hand and honoured with his name. Upon his death
his estates were confiscated, and granted by the narrow-minded pedant,
who sacrificed to policy and intrigue his glorious life, to his
infamous minion Somerset. Upon his fall they were bestowed upon the
singular George Digby, Earl of Bristol,[12] whose adventures form some
of the most diverting anecdotes in Clarendon’s history. It has since
remained in the Digby family. On the opposite side of the lake are the
ruins of the castle of Sherborne, held out by a lady of the family
against the dismantling summons of Cromwell. The ground is classic; an
eminence called Jerusalem Hill is crowned on the summit with a clump of
firs planted by Pope. He was a frequent inmate, and the friend of an
affectionate brother and sister, whose affection he has commemorated in
an epitaph in Sherborne Church.

[Sidenote: LORD WESTMORELAND]

We found only Mr. Hoare with Ld. Digby, a brother of Sr. R. Hoare,[13]
the owner of Stourhead, a handsome, gentlemanlike young man. The next
day Ld. Westmoreland[14] came. He is coarse in mind, manners, and
language. The first is overbearing and sanguinary; he appears to be
one who thinks strong measures indicate a strong mind, and that vigour
denotes intrepidity, whereas in my opinion the reverse is proved, for
genuine fortitude inculcates clemency. His manners are those that
spring from power engrafted upon a low education, and his language is a
symbol of both. I do not wonder he is accused of having sowed the seeds
of the late rebellion in Ireland; he seems of a character calculated to
irritate wavering loyalty into rebellion. He spoke so brutally of some
of the wretched prisoners who had escaped his fury, that my heart beat
high with indignation, and even _I_ for a moment felt a movement
in behalf of a nation I never liked.

There have been a few newcomers every day; Mr. Newbolt came over to
see us. Yesterday Mr. Wingfield,[15] who married Ld. Digby’s sister,
arrived. He is like Archibald Hamilton, who, by-the-bye, is now become
Ld. A. H.,[16] in person, and unfortunately, in manner resembles Mr.
Chaplin,[17] the same precise, deliberate way of speaking.

Since I have been here I have read a _Life of Voltaire_, written,
I believe, by Condorcet. It proves what I was not at all aware of--that
Voltaire was really persecuted for his freedom of opinions, and that
a timely escape and concealment was necessary to save his liberty
at different periods. Absurd and unjust as most of the attacks are
against _philosophy_, as it is called, one must admit that those
free principles and the spirit of investigation which pervades all
Voltaire’s writings, tended very much to induce people to attempt
eradicating prejudices and making reforms before they had well examined
into the abuses or prepared a remedy against them. It is without an
example in the records of mankind that a single man, unaided by the
fanaticism of religious superstition, should have produced such a
change in the sentiments of a large bulk of Europe as Voltaire did:
one can scarcely say it has been for the better when the devastation
of France is now before our eyes. Whatever mischief may have arisen
from the freedom of discussion, I think many now living will outlive
the practice, as there is an anti-conspiracy to that of which the
philosophers are accused now making among the rich and powerful--one
that, if pursued with the ardour I see many enter into it with, will
inevitably be the ruin of all taste, literature, and civil liberty.
The young men of fashion and birth are bit with a military mania; they
all aim at attaining a martial air, and a reputation for strictness in
their Militia discipline. Without reflecting much, they are persuaded
a military force is necessary to keep the people down, and that as
religion is co-existent with the State, so it is wise to support
it even in its abuses. Fifty years hence I have no hesitation in
foretelling that there will be little toleration, a curbed press, a
great standing army, and what is called a _vigilant_ government.

[Sidenote: BOBUS SMITH]

Poor Doctor Ingenhousz is gone for ever; he died last week at Bowood.
Ld. L., with his warm benevolence to those to whom he is attached,
afforded him every friendly comfort to the last. He did not shun the
sight of a dying man, altho’ at his time of life the spectacle is
but painful to contemplate, as it brings to mind a crisis that to him
cannot be very distant. Ingenhousz was a Dutchman by birth; he was
first distinguished as an inoculator to the Imperial Court.

We stayed exactly a week at Sherborne; I passed my time agreeably and
left it with regret. I did nothing the whole morning but float upon
the water in a state of luxurious indolence. Ld. Digby told me he had
heard that Ld. Ossory had asked the Chancellor for a Commissioner
of Bankruptcy for Bobus.[18] I can believe it _now_, tho’ two
years ago I was credulous enough to receive as sincere the fustian
declamations upon independence, and that a lofty, aspiring mind would
owe nothing to the influence of others; that it would extort reward by
its sole merit, and that the only check upon his felicity in uniting
himself to his antiquated wife was that her connections were great and
powerful, which, to little minds, might be supposed operated as an
inducement to the union.

Not, however, to speak fairly, do I think these motives actuated him:
I truly believe he imagined he felt the _belle passion_. Be that
as it may, I now think he is disposed to avail himself very readily
of any advantage those connections can procure him, for his whole
deportment recently demonstrates what is always said, ‘That no one
despises situation and family, but those who have no claim nor chance
of either.’ He reminds me of the old story of the opera contractor,
Gallini, who captivated a lady of noble family, Lady Betty Germaine,
and was astonished at hearing that his marriage with her did not
ennoble him, and that he did not legally become what he styled himself,
Ld. Betty Gallini. The alteration has not escaped the keenness of
Dumont, who observes that after a visit to Warwick Castle he is more
than usually inflated with dignity and a soaring spirit; he says the
_Lord-erie_ of the coronets, escutcheons, towers, gateways, etc.,
at that place inspire him by anticipation with all the haughtiness he
will feel when he fulfils the dignities he expects to acquire.

Fifty thousand years, if so many were allowed, would not efface from
my mind the advice a man gave me about my poor little girl; he said,
‘Suppress her entirely; do not let her suffer in a pecuniary way. She
is not injured, as she is ignorant of what she loses. Success for
her is doubtful, and the misconstruction and chattering of the world
against her is certain.’ These worldly maxims revolted my feelings, but
convinced me he who could give them was made to thrive, and would not
kick at that stumbling-block in the road to ambition which throws many
off their course, called _genuine_ honesty, as there is a material
difference in the essential properties of that quality. The one he
will make use of will help him on. Depraved as men are in a corrupt
state of things, they yet like the names of virtues as much as they
abhor the practice. La Rochefoucauld says, ‘L’hypocrisie est un hommage
que le vice rend à la vertu.’ I heard of Dr. Parr’s saying a thing to
Mackintosh that was more coarse than witty, but yet it was pointed and
quick. Mackintosh, in canvassing O’Coigly’s character, alluding to some
transactions, said, ‘That was shabby; besides, his confession proved
that he died with a lie in his mouth.’ ‘No, no, Jemmy, he was not
shabby, because he was an Irishman and _not_ a Scotchman; he did
_not_ die with a lie in his mouth, because he was a Catholic and
_not_ a philosopher.’

    Leaving Sherborne they went to Saltram by way of Honiton,
    Exeter, Ashburton and Ivybridge.

[Sidenote: SALTRAM]

This house (Saltram, Ld. Boringdon’s) is quite the best I ever
resided in. The apartments are numerous and excellent; they contain
many pictures, and some very fine. It is an immense pile of building.
The beauty of the view depends upon the tide, which when full is very
pleasing, Mount Edgcombe, Plymouth, etc. Switzerland, Italy, the Tyrol,
and Nice have rendered me difficult about picturesque and grand views,
therefore I am less inclined to be enthusiastic than most people.

Living in a house built and liked by the great Raleigh[19] brought him
more forcibly to my recollection. I turned over various histories to
obtain all I could relating to him,--_State Trials_, _Biographia
Britannica_, Gibbon’s _Memoirs_, Osborne’s detached remarks.
I stayed at Saltram till the 22nd September. Ye time slipped away
easily. Ld. Bor. was really happy at seeing us, and cordiality combined
with goodheartedness and temper are such excellent ingredients in a
character, that if there are any deficiencies they are overlooked. I
had the misfortune--and a most severe, heartfelt one it was--to lose
my faithful companion, my attached Pierrot.[20] He died! I loved him
for his own merits, and was grateful for his devotion to me; indeed,
I am convinced that he could not have survived my loss. Ld. H. made
impromptu the following lines for his epitaph:--

    Pierrot, of race, of form, of manners rare,
    Envied alike in life and death lies here.
    Living he proved the favourite of the fair,
    And dying drew from beauty’s eye a tear.

He was the gift of Ld. Henry.[21] He faithfully maintained the love for
me his master felt whilst living. Peace to them both!

I viewed the dockyard and Mt. Edgecombe from it; I was too timid to
venture in a boat across the Hamoaze. Many people came to dinner;
Colonels of the Militia Regiments quartered at Plymouth, the celebrated
Tommy Onslow,[22] who was full of jokes and puns. Some are good; to me
he was entertaining, as I did not know his stock, but that is slender,
and they are often repeated. Seeing him but once or twice did not
exhaust them. Sir John Frederick[23] is a mild, gentlemanlike man; he
has the manners of a man of the world, pleasant conversation, and a
fair portion of information. Colonel Montagu[24] I saw but once. Ld.
Bor. announced him as a superior man, and I was therefore prepared for
something remarkable, tho’ his praises are often queerly bestowed,
frequently for the love of paradox, to surprise by admiring what others
disapprove. However, Col. M. appears to be clever: he launched forth
upon the topics he is _au fait_ of, and during a three-hours’
assemblage of people at and after dinner he gave the natural history
of every bird that flies and every fish that swims. He is a man of
bad temper, nor does it sound creditable to him that none of his
officers speak to him, and they are upon the eve of bringing him to
a Court-martial. He is separated from his wife, and might inherit an
estate of his brother’s if he would be united to her; but the condition
is too hard, and he renounces the possession of a benefit _so_
encumbered.

[Sidenote: DUKE OF SOMERSET]

The Duke of Somerset[25] came over and stayed at two different times.
He would have liked to have made a longer visit, but his mother was
arrived at Plymouth, and she is a jealous bigot. He possesses a plain
understanding and a mind in a progressive state of improvement. He
reads and reflects and judges for himself, mixed with great diffidence
and caution. He has had no advantage from an intercourse with the
world. He lives retired, and it is quite singular to observe the
impression a common, sensible remark, which might be made by anybody,
makes upon him; he looks at one, pauses, and exclaims ‘Very true!’
in a sincere way, that manifests that he is struck with the justness
of the observation, and that he admires the sagacity of the person.
I perceived this during the conversation I had with him, and the
points that struck him were merely such as any person at all _au
courant_ of common events would make, rather commonplace, tho’
true. His politics are just and temperate; his principles precisely
those of a reflecting man, not actuated by any party motives, viewing
things not men. He deprecates the inadvertencies of Opposition, as they
have rendered themselves so obnoxious that they are dreaded in the
country, and have been the means of throwing an unfounded popularity
upon King and Ministers. He feels the necessity of abridging the
power of the Crown, which he thinks has made rapid strides towards
absolute, independent Monarchy. The first step to be taken, he thinks,
is to obtain peace almost upon any terms, and the next to retrench
the dangerous extension of prerogative this unfortunate war has
given to the King. He has a taste for literature, rather free upon
religious subjects, a great admirer of Gibbon--not his style, but his
sentiments; many passages he knew by heart and repeated, tho’ from
diffidence he could hardly finish a sentence, but that soon wore off.
He seems well-read in polemics, knew the arguments urged on both sides
in all the modern controversies, Parr, Travis, Curtis, Porson, Paley,
Gisborne, etc. Upon the whole, I should be pleased to improve my
knowledge of him. His brother[26] is a great mathematician and man of
science. He would not come, but proposed solving an abstract problem
with Mr. Playfair,[27] which had occupied him for some days.

[Sidenote: MR. DUGALD STUART]

On ye 25th we arrived here, Bowood, where we have found a numerous
party. The Archbishop of Bordeaux,[28] a man who practises the piety
and resignation his profession bids him teach. Tho’ fallen from a
high dignity which he supported with honour, he has not been heard to
utter an unavailing regret upon the past; he is truly respectable.
His Grand Vicaire, L’Abbé Landrecelles, is also entitled to praise
for his philosophy. Another Abbé, who is sensible, also was here.
Indeed, the whole class of clergy have alone distinguished themselves
by their conduct; they acted from principle, and are rewarded with
universal esteem and respect. Mr. Dugald Stuart[29] and his wife, from
Edinburgh, were here: he is reserved, and I did not hear him speak, but
he is supposed deservedly to enjoy a high reputation. She is clever,
well-informed, and pleasing.

I read Voltaire’s _Memoirs_, written by himself; I do not think
any of his works abound with more genuine wit. The whole narrative of
his connection with the King of Prussia is a _chef d’œuvre_, but
tho’ he tells his own story, yet it is evident that he was in the wrong
in their quarrel.

The Duke of York has met with a check in his attack on Alkmaer; he
seems to have quarrelled with Abercromby,[30] as his official dispatch
is silent in his praise. I fear the whole expedition will fail, and
prove a useless waste of blood and treasure.

There is some perverse quality in the mind that seems to take an active
pleasure in destroying the amusement it promises to itself. It never
fails to baffle my expectations; so sure as I propose to my imagination
an agreeable conversation with a person where past experience warrants
the hope, so sure am I disappointed. I feel it perpetually, for
example, with Dumont; with him I have passed very many cheerful hours.
This knowledge tempts me to renew our walks, the consequence is we both
yawn. I can only account for it from a mutual effort to revive the same
topics, or that we both endeavour to infuse a liveliness equal to
what we remember pervaded our past conversations; and where there is
labour there is always failure. It is now got over; we have ascertained
that we each vary in _agrément_, either from condition, weather,
or other circumstances; and we have made up our minds to it, and are
four times in five highly gratified. I am convinced there is a period
in all intimacies where that feeling takes place. I am so persuaded of
the impracticability of arranging, ‘_Now_ we will be pleasant,’
that I shun settling a meeting: chance does favourably what method
would destroy. He possesses a fund quite inexhaustible of amusement,
literature, anecdotes, lively observation, disquisition upon grave
subjects; all this combined with a good heart and temper. He spends
his leisure too much upon an occupation that I should doubt repaying
him with fruit equal to the labour. He is translating and elucidating
a metaphysical system upon legislation, jurisprudence, etc., of
Bentham’s. His imagination appears better calculated to adorn the
_belles lettres_ with just criticism than to define the Penal
Code. But no person of abilities finds out exactly their excellence.
Boccaccio despised the only work which makes him immortal. He never
showed his friend Petrarch his _Decamerone_, tho’ upon second
thoughts Petrarch must have known parts at least of the work, as he
tells him in their letters he frequently reads _Griselda_, but
never without shedding tears. Beautiful as the _Griselda_ is in ye
Italian, I am almost disposed to prefer our Chaucer’s English version;
there is a pathetic simplicity that touches the heart. The expressions
are very natural where one can understand the language.

The day before we left Bowood Mr. Jekyll came. He is never so pleasant
where Ld. L. is, as elsewhere; he aims at being the grave senator, and
becomes pompous, didactic, and, with his merry little figure, one may
add ridiculous.

[Sidenote: MR. FOX’S ACCIDENT]

On Tuesday we left Bowood. Our long conversations and disputes upon
Stonehenge and the Druidical worship made us desirous of seeing that
remarkable place: we therefore went by it to London. It is, to be sure,
a most wonderful edifice, let it be raised by who it may. I shall
transcribe great part of the description of its situation, etc., from
Gough’s edition of Camden’s _Britannia_.

We arrived that night at Basingstoke, and arrived here on Wednesday.
We found Ste. in perfect health and spirits; he is fat and ugly, but
very merry and strong. His head is beautifully shaped; his ears are
as pretty as his father’s; he will be darker than Charles. In the
eve. Ld. H. went to see his uncle Mr. Fox, who was confined in town
under the care of two surgeons. A gun burst in his hand and shattered
his fingers. There was for some time a danger of his losing one of
them. Hamilton came and stayed a night. There is a great perplexity in
the family about his brother’s name, whether it is to be Douglas or
Clydesdale.[31] The Chancellor has started the difficulty, but Scotch
etiquettes are a _mer à boire_. The late Duke made no will, but
left bonds to a great amount, for which his personal property must
answer; thus the fine pictures at the Palace of Hamilton will go to the
hammer. There is no danger of Ld. Stanley claiming the dukedom.

I went on Thursday to the play; General Fitzpatrick came with us. Sr.
Lionel[32] dined with us on Saturday, and Hamilton. On Sunday, General
Fox.[33] He is going immediately to Minorca, where he is appointed
Governor. His wife is not to accompany him now; she imputes her not
doing so to Sr. James St. Clair’s pompous dispatches, in which he
announces the intention of the Spaniards to attack that place, a vapour
to give himself importance.

_10th October, ’99._--On Monday last Ld. H. moved for leave to
bring in an Address to his Majesty upon the Russian Treaties;[34]
consequently the House is summoned, and to-morrow he is to bring it
forward. He is extremely nervous, not having spoken in public for some
months till the other two days last week. The Treaty for ye 17,000 men
employed in Holland contains an article contrary to ye constitution:
‘His Majesty _engages_, in case the troops should be compelled to
leave Holland at a season when the Baltic is frozen over, that they
shall pass ye winter in England.’ This article is a direct violation
of the laws, and without precedent. He means to introduce at the same
time a wish that measures may be taken to manifest a desire of peace.

[Sidenote: EXPEDITION TO HOLLAND]

Alkmaer is taken with a great loss of men; the details are not yet
come. Tierney was here this morning in a sort of perplexity at a
suspicion of Nepean’s,[35] the Under-Secretary of State. It seems that
in a private letter from General Coote to Sr. Charles Grey[36] the
_truth_ is told of the conduct of the Russians, who absolutely
refused to advance, throwing themselves flat on their bellies and
declaring they would not stir. This letter Tierney saw, and it was
known to Nepean that he had seen it. Combining that with Ld. H.’s
motion to-morrow, they feared this circumstance would be made public,
and Sr. C. Grey came to town this morning, in a fright, to explain
matters. The fact is, Ld. H. knew nothing of the affair till to-day,
and at Tierney’s request from Sr. C. G. of course will not make any use
of the knowledge.

_11th October, ’99._--On Wednesday, 9th October, Ld. King[37]
passed the day and dined. He is young and handsome. His political
principles are strongly anti-Government; his liking to Ld. H. makes
him act with him, tho’ his opinion disposes him to exceed the limits
Opposition have drawn to themselves; _pour trancher le mot_,
he is what is called a Jacobin. His dislike to what is established
is more against the Church than to the State: he quite abhors the
Christian religion. He has a considerable share of information in
theology, metaphysics, and political economy. Seeing him but once
sociably, I cannot accurately estimate his worth. He is a most
affectionate, excellent son. He came to town on purpose to second Ld.
H. to-night. Tho’ he is not a remarkable speaker, yet he is stout,
and Ld. H. expects to find a consolation in having him; as any person
who is warm on the same side must be a relief from the _agony_
of a solitary opposition. Yesterday I had a visit from a strange man,
a Dr. Hager;[38] he was employed by ye King of Naples to detect a
literary fraud in Sicily. One of the impostures was a supposed Arabic
translation of all the works of Livy containing the lost books: this
curiosity he discovered to be an ingenious fabrication. The other was
some grants to the Church during the period where there is a hiatus
in ye Sicilian history. His head is crammed full of metaphysics and
erudition, to the total exclusion of every particle of common sense. I
could perceive _rays_ of _illumination_ about him, when he
talked of his admiration of truth and the necessity among enlightened
people to substitute a moral catechism for _that_ built upon the
credulity and superstition of mankind. His _generous spirit_ of
converting those misled by error, alias religion, will involve him in
scrapes should he not be wiser before he publishes in this country, as
I suspect it has done already in Germany. He is one of Ld. Wycombe’s
strange men; he picked him up in Sicily.

[Sidenote: LORD AMHERST]

Amherst came; I complimented him upon his speech. He seconded the
Address.[39] He was sure to do it with propriety, therefore a
congratulation was safe; as he is as certain of not exposing as he
is of not distinguishing himself. He has a good heart, with a narrow
mind; of all the young men he is the most _borné_ in point of
intellect. Nature seems to have determined upon confining him within
_proprieties_. He was born to be a courtier, to live upon the
terrace at Windsor, and wear the uniform; beyond that he will never
get, unless Canning may want a _tête-de-perruque_ to fill up a gap
in any motley Administration he may have the forming of hereafter.

Tierney spent the whole morn.; I am very happy to discover that he
has dropped the folly that made him tiresome and ridiculous this
summer. To-day Mr. Grey came to assist Ld. H. in some calculations and
in drawing up the Address; he is very pleasing when at his ease. We
laughed over Tierney’s unsteadiness; one day his determination to make
motions upon every great question, the next his _abattement_ and
timidity. Grey told a good answer of Mr. Beddinfield’s to Dundas. A few
years ago the mob attacked ye King’s carriage and were going to commit
some violence. Mr. B. was in the park; he immediately pulled out a
pistol, and dispelled the rioters. The next day Dundas asked him what
he would have bestowed upon him as token of favour. He said, ‘I wish
only, Sir, that you would make me a Scotchman.’

He read the surgeon’s letter giving an account of his brother’s wound;
the ball went through the knee, and was extracted from the hollow ham
within. It seems to have been an escape. Grey was going over to see
him, unless this good report had come.

_Sunday, October 13th, ’99._--Ld. H. made a motion for peace. He
was satisfied with himself, especially in his reply to Ld. Grenville.
From his account I should fear that, tho’ it was able, it was too
personal.

On that very night came the news of the strange reverse the Allies have
experienced, 19,000 Austrians and Russians captured and slaughtered,
Zurich retaken, and many other places in Switzerland; Hotze, the
Austrian General, killed;[40] Suwarrow had crossed the St. Gothard to
relieve that army, and when they were defeated he was advancing to
assist. Ld. Macartney has just brought me the further news, which is
that the cruel, bloody Suwarrow is totally defeated and probably taken
prisoner. The monster who in cold blood cut the throats of women and
children in Warsaw and the suburbs, and who exceeded his orders to make
them more barbarous at Ismail, will not excite my pity even under the
most rigorous captivity. There let him groan. The day of retribution
ought to be in this life, to convince one that punishment is not
withheld to a dubious period. These famous Russians, who have been so
puffed since they have been subsidised, turn out to be the only fit
food for powder, as nowhere do they fight; in Italy all the glory of
the expulsion of the French from thence is due to the brave Austrians.
Thus has this mighty horde of barbarians dwindled to a handful of
tattered, ill-disciplined, worse-officered, half-starved savages.

[Sidenote: PARIS FASHIONS]

Ld. Macartney was present at the debate; he said Ld. H.’s reply was
excellent, that it proved him to have very superior abilities, but he
altogether disapproves so much of the line he has taken that he cannot
be hearty in any praise.

Bonaparte has gained a great victory at Aboukir;[41] the tower is
defended, but must fall. It is supposed Sr. Sidney Smith is in it.
When he is Bonaparte’s prisoner it is to be hoped he will assist
him to correct his narrative of the affair of Acre, as Sr. Sidney’s
rhodomontades do not accord much with probability. It was an unnatural
state of things that Bonaparte should have for a moment such a buskin
hero for a competitor; whilst he was eclipsed, one might say:--

    An eagle tow’ring in its height of pride
    Was by a mousing owl hawk’d at, and killed.

I went yesterday morning to see a milliner who is just arrived from
Paris; she brings strange dresses and fashions, and some sumptuous,
costly to a degree that she cannot get a purchaser. She complains that
a Deputy’s wife at Paris spends more upon her attire than a duchess
does here. She has veils that cost 50 guineas, morning head-dresses 20,
and so on in proportion. She says Paris never was yet at such a pitch
of luxury and _recherche_ in dress as at present.

_Saturday, 19th._--On Sunday last Mr. and Mrs. Stuart and Dr.
Hager dined here. On Monday we went to the play with the Stuarts.
On Tuesday Ld. Macartney, Calonne, James, and the Fish dined, very
tolerably pleasant. On Wednesday I went to see Mr. James’s pretty room
and fine books; he has given in to the luxury of splendid editions,
broad paper, and sumptuous bindings. The collection is as complete
as possible for the sort of thing, but the expense is enormous, and
hardly answers in point of enjoyment, tho’ one is not sorry to see fine
specimens of the various arts of printing, papermaking, bookbinding,
etc., etc. He has contrived to spend 5000_l._ upon articles that
lie in a very small compass.

The Bessboroughs, who have just returned from ye Isle of Thanet,
dined with us; they brought Ld. Boringdon. There was besides Mr. Wm.
Smith,[42] an Irish orator, who made a fine speech and wrote a good
pamphlet in favour of the Union. He is uncommonly bashful, an infirmity
not peculiar to his nation, but one which impedes his being reckoned as
able as he is to common observers.

The whole Dutch expedition has failed, and the troops are coming back
forthwith, tho’ there are great apprehensions entertained as to their
being able to withdraw without immense loss; they calculate upon
losing their rearguard of 3000 men.[43] Out of evil there is good:
Lds. Morpeth and G. Leveson had offered their services, and were upon
the point of going. Ld. G. is raising a regiment, and is appointed
Lt.-Col. I am sorry he throws away very excellent abilities upon a
profession where so little is required--at least, as it is practised in
this country; and I believe as a good patriot one ought to hope it may
for ever remain as insignificant as it has done hitherto. Parliament is
adjourned until January. We went to the play, Tierney, Mr. Hoare, and
Capt. Murray. Confirmation of the French accounts of the losses of the
Allies in Switzerland, etc., etc.

[Sidenote: PRICE OF SUGAR]

_Sunday, 20th, ’99._--The whole day I was confined to my own den
by a most villainous cold. After we had finished our dinner Ld. Morpeth
came to dine. He arrived in town only the preceding evening.

The immense price of sugar has defeated the avarice of the proprietors
of it; various experiments have been made, first, to extract sugar
from saccharine vegetables, and then to grow it in different climates.
In Prussia they obtain 8 lbs. weight of good sugar from 100 lbs. of
beet root. In America a settlement called the Notches, above the river
Ohio, has grown a large quantity from the sugar cane. The price is only
kept up by some commercial artifice winked at by the Government. The
revenues of the West Indians will be considerably diminished, and tho’
I ultimately may suffer I confess I should feel very little sorrow if
they had been at 0 for the last four years; then _he_ would not
have added another example to the many--that injustice thrives.

_25th, Friday, Money Hill._--On Sunday, 20th, Curran[44] dined
with us. He was intimidated at the sight of the tables as he passed
through the room, and told Mr. Tierney he feared he should not be able
to speak. He kept his word, as he did not utter three sentences during
dinner. We had, besides, Mr. Grey, ye Bessbro’s, Mr. Weld, Mr. George
Ponsonby[45] (the Irish orator), and the Duke of Bedford. On Monday Mr.
Wm. Smith, the Irish Unionist, Mr. Hoare, whom I knew at Sherborne, and
Calonne. Calonne slept. He gave us a most interesting narrative of the
assembling of the Notables, and many particulars of the latter event
during his Administration; if ever I have patience I believe I would
detail the account. We went the next day to Money Hill, where we found
the Smiths. They stayed till Thursday, on which day Ld. Bor. came. He
went on Friday; we returned home on Saturday....

On Tuesday the Beauclerks went. She wished very much to stay, as her
health required repose; the motion of the carriage disagrees with her
always, and she was not recovered from the journey of the day before.
This consideration, added to her being far advanced with child, had
no effect upon Beau.; he was positive. I fear he is disposed to be
peremptory in trifles. I do not like to give way to all my fears upon
the score of his temper, but she is all sense and gentleness. Ld.
Morpeth and Dumont dined, a very pleasant dinner. Ld. M. stayed, and
_cause’d_ late; Dumont slept. Ld. M. is very amiable in a small
party, where he is quite at his ease.

Bonaparte is returned with his staff to Paris. The cause of his return
is involved in mystery as yet.[46]

[Sidenote: A MIXED PARTY]

_7th November._--I have just begun La Harpe’s _Cours de Littérature_;
they are lectures upon _les belles lettres_, delivered at the Lycée.
On Friday, 1st Nov., a remarkable pleasant day, Ld. Ossory, Macartney,
Morpeth, Calonne, Fish Craufurd, Tierney. The youth of Ld. M., and the
Jacobinism of the latter did not promise to accord with the years and
gravity of the rest of the party, but the singularity gave a zest, and
everybody was delighted. Tierney won so much upon Ld. Macartney, that
I am sure he might be made coadjutor to any outlandish embassy Ld. M.
may be appointed to: he boasts of being _homme à tout plat_. Ld. Ossory
was very happy, notwithstanding my Lady’s prohibition of his being so
within these walls.

The Smiths came in the evening. We were to have taken them next day
to my mother’s in Suffolk, that Mrs. S. might visit her father at
Newmarket, but during the night Ld. H. was seized with some sharp
twinges of the gout, which obliged us to delay our journey, much to my
disappointment, as by it I lost the sight of my dear little Harriet.
Saturday alone with the Smiths. Sunday Dr. Hager came; Smiths went
away. Ld. H. continued ill; not so bad as the fit last autumn. It is
curious that the pain seized him almost the day twelvemonth.

_10th Nov. Sunday._--The failure of the Dutch expedition has
created at the time a great sensation, but the public mind is absorbed
in the expectation of another enterprise upon the French coast. All
parties disclaim having projected it. Pitt’s friends say it was all
Dundas’s scheme; he again lays it to the Queen and Princess of Orange;
and they to the _map-makers_ for placing dry land where there
ought to be swamps. The only person who uniformly disapproved of the
undertaking was the Stadtholder.

Public affairs everywhere have assumed a gloomy aspect. The badness of
the season has destroyed the corn in many counties, and the increased
price of provisions in the setting in of a threatening winter announces
misery to the wretched poor and perhaps no small clamour from them, as
certainly the corn sent to Holland must have taken considerably from
the stock here, besides that the transports employed to convey the
troops were chiefly North-country colliers. Thus the price of coals is
at an unknown height, 60 shillings the chauldron. (In December 1799, 6
_guineas_.)

I have been reading _Joseph Andrews_. It is, in point of interest,
inferior to _Tom Jones_. There are scenes where the wit is even
more excellent, but the _nature_ of his characters are sacrificed
to a love of buffoonery. Parson Adams is frequently put into situations
so extravagant that the ludicrous is destroyed by the impossibility
of the events. Fielding had a model, his tutor, a Dr. Young,[47] who
was full of learning and simplicity. There is a story of him whilst
he was chaplain to one of the Duke of Marlborough’s regiments. The
enemies were encamped near each other expecting to be engaged; the
_distrait_ chaplain walked out, and was so absorbed in the perusal
of his _Æschylus_ that he passed the lines. A sentinel seized him
for a spy, and carried him to the general. During his examination he
stated so naturally that without thinking of anything one foot followed
the other, and brought him without his knowledge where he was, adding
that he assured his Excellence he was no spy. ‘Ah, mon ami, I sincerely
believe you. The D. of M. ne vous aurez jamais choisi pour espion, mais
vous resterez dîner.’ He was sent off, fully acquitted of the suspicion.

[Sidenote: CALONNE]

I have endeavoured to persuade Calonne to write his _Mémoires_.
Even those of his own life would be interesting; but the period of his
Administration, and his generous sacrifices to the Princes subsequent
to their emigration, would fill up a period in the history of the
Revolution which can only be well done by him. He set the best machine
of revolt in motion. His own story is that when at the head of the
Finance he found that for many years the expenditure of the Government
had exceeded its receipts, and that Necker’s _compte rendu_ was
a false assertion upon false fact: that to remedy this deficit he had
persuaded the King to let him propose an equal taxation to the Noblesse
and Clergy; that the Queen also was got over, till the night before he
was to make his speech to the Notables, when she joined the faction
headed by the Archevêque de Sens.[48]

A _bon mot_ of Mirabeau upon him. He was a rash, impetuous man,
without conduct or judgment. ‘L’Archevêque de Sens est toujours hors de
son diocèse.’

I am reading the Arabian History in the most methodical way, too
laborious to continue. I read Marigny, and refer to Ockley, the
_Universal History_, and Gibbon. The latter I shall read when I
have finished the others, because to read Gibbon one must understand
the history he writes of _à fond_--at least so from his summary
way of describing one should infer he thought it necessary for his
readers.

Sunday, we had a very pleasant party, Hare, Fitzpatrick, Ld. Robert,
Mackintosh, Mr. Scarlett, Smiths, Dumont. Mackintosh talked very
pleasantly: his efforts to please were guided by good taste. His memory
is very correct and retentive; he illustrated literary criticisms
with lively quotations, particularly from Burke and Gibbon. Mr.
Scarlett[49] is a rising man at the Bar; his profits are more upon
the circuit than in the King’s Bench, but when Erskine and some few
of the monopolists are removed he will distinguish himself there. He
has an uncommonly benevolent countenance; his heart seems full of
mild virtues; tho’ very unassuming, he yet is agreeable in a mixed
conversation. Smith’s boisterous yet superior intellect did not
dominate; Hare’s keen wit and the General’s discerning taste subdued
his usual propensity to overpower with clamour and dispute for victory
alone. He was temperate and entertaining.

Hare was in full glee; they had all dined at the Lord Mayor’s Feast the
day before. Combe[50] is an Opposition man, and the _patriots_
were received with acclamations in the City; Fox was dragged by the
populace, so was the Duke of Bedford. The whole civic festival went off
with triumph to the _party_.

Whitbread, the _arch-seceder_, is disposed to return to his duty
in Parliament, and measures are to be taken to persuade Mr. Fox to
do the same. God knows whether they will succeed. It is a matter of
very little consequence whether they do nor not, as the prejudice in
the country is too strong to be conquered even by the misconduct and
failure of Ministers. The General stayed all night.

[Sidenote: DUMONT]

This morning, Monday, 11th, Dumont left. I was sorry to lose him, as
he is _facile à vivre_ and full of amusement to me. He is very
universally liked by all who have the least relish for literature and
good conversation. We had rather a motley mixture at dinner: Hare,
Fitzpatrick, General Dalrymple,[51] Capt. Murray, and the Duke of
Bedford. The latter is in very bad health; his spirits are visibly
affected. On ye 12th the General left us to make some alterations at
Sunning Hill; Hare, only, to dinner. On Wednesday Ld. H. went out for
the first time. Lewis dined: he repeated some verses he wrote this
last summer in Scotland, ‘Reflections in a Royal Burying-ground.’ They
are the best of his, quite in a grand style; there are parts full of
philosophy and feeling. In the evening a very comfortable gossiping
coze with Hare.

The price of porter is raised; the augmentation has been admitted
without clamour. Every article of _first necessity_ is alarmingly
dear.

_14th Nov., ’99._--I continue reading the Arabian history with
interest, especially in Ockley, whose style is plain and manly, tho’
criticism might be busy detecting vulgarisms. A comical observation
of Gibbon’s upon himself in his _Memoirs_ just occurs. He
says, ‘Ye year 1770 was particularly favourable to the growth of my
_intellectual_ stature.’ The expressions are uncommonly ludicrous,
combining it with the recollection of his misshapen, grotesque figure;
for he was a monster, and so filthy withal that one could not endure
being close to him.

On Thursday, Tierney, Dumont, Sr. Lionel, and Hare to dine; very lively
and pleasant. Tierney bore a very equal share in the task of amusing
with Hare, who is unique in excellence.

Friday alone. Saturday Mr. Morrice came to stay. Went to the play,
where I gained a violent _migraine_ and additional cold; brought
the Smiths home.

_Sunday, 17th._--Sick with headache. Hare to dinner, Duke of
Bedford, Robinson, Major Hare, Hare’s son. Laughed so immoderately
at Hare’s liveliness that my head was much worse, and I went to bed
seriously ill. The Duke of Bedford looks infinitely better. I am in
great hopes he will recover. He is in better spirits.

_12th January, 1800._--A variety of little circumstances and
frequent illnesses have prevented me from continuing regularly my
notes. I went in the course of the month of December to Dalham.[52] I
saw my dear child. Mrs. Smith went with us. Our visit did not exceed
four days; we returned by the way of Cambridge, Ld. H. Petty and Mr.
Debarry dined with us there. I was curious to ascertain whether the
Gothic architecture of Henry VII. [_sic_] chapel would please
me now, as it did many years ago, long before I saw the wonders of
Italy: I found time and comparison had not in the least diminished my
admiration of it.

[Sidenote: NAPOLEON’S LETTER]

Bonaparte returned suddenly from Egypt to France. He has overthrown
the Directory, and the then form of Governt., and established a
constitution at the head of which he is placed as Grand Consul. Should
it be a permanent usurpation I will learn with accuracy the outlines,
but the revolutions have been as variable as chemical nomenclature or
systems of metaphysics. He opened a negotiation for peace lately by
writing a letter _directly_ to the King: his offer was rejected
upon frivolous and peevish pretexts. The reply was made in the most
barbarous language, crabbed, ungrammatical, and incomprehensible.[53]
The joke of the day was that each of the Ministers who were present
contributed their phrase: Mr. Pitt, ‘ye limited possibilities’; to Mr.
Windham, ‘the line of hereditary Princes’; Ld. Grenville, ‘rapine,
anarchy, and plunder’; nor were Lds. Westmoreland and Camden forgotten
by giving ‘their explicit acquiescence’ to all that was done.

I went to a Harlequin farce on ye 28th December after dining in
Cavendish Square; a gun was fired off, which frightened me, and on the
morrow I was taken ill. I was very weak and confined to my bed many
days; this day is ye 13th, and I am still indisposed.

During my confinement I have been reading among other things multitudes
of novels, most of them sad trash, abounding with the general taste
for spectres, hobgoblins, castles, etc., etc. Godwin has added to
his publications; critics say, not to his reputation. In his preface
he announces that he has not abided by the principles contained in
his _Political Justice_, as he throughout the work shows that
the greatest calamity is to loosen the ties of social confidence and
domestic love.[54] Poor Mr. Weld, who dined here occasionally, dropped
dead at the Tower, playing at whist with Ld. Thanet. He died under
great pecuniary embarrassments. Marsh came to us the first day of
the vacation; Ly. Lucy and the Dss.[55] were in the house, but it so
happened by Ly. L.’s illness and sure management on our part that they
never met.

_13th Jan._--Monsieur de Bouillé se plaignant de la Révolution
dit, ‘Ce sont nos gens d’esprit qui nous ont perdu.’ ‘Ah, Monsieur, que
ne nous sauviez-vous’ [_sic_], said Mde. de Coigny.

Quand le mariage de Lord Paget fut remis à cause de l’accident qu’il
eut en se tirant la botte, elle dit, ‘C’était un mariage remis àpropos
de bottes.’

Une personne, attaquée de paralisie à mi-corps, étant depuis grosse,
elle dit, ‘Elle accouchera donc d’un profil.’

Lorsque Monsr. d’Épremesnil perdit sa popularité, il demanda à Mde.
de Coigny pourquoi le même peuple qui l’avait couronné de laurier
l’accablait d’injures et le brûlait en effigie. ‘C’est,’ dit-elle, ‘que
rien ne brûle plus vite que le laurier dépêché.’

Allant dîner oû elle comptait s’ennuyer, elle dit, ‘Ce dîner me pèse
sur le cœur avant de me peser sur l’estomac.’

A _polacre_ conveying dispatches from Alexandria to France was
taken off Toulon, carried into Minorca, and the dispatches, which did
not sink when thrown overboard, have been forwarded by General Fox
to the Governt. They contain minute details of the military colony,
and complaints of their being in total want of ammunition, etc., etc.
The official letter is from Kléber; he conveys a sort of censure upon
Bonaparte for his having quitted the army. He encloses Bonaparte’s
letter to the army upon his quitting Egypt, in which various reasons
for his departure are given; among them is _l’obéissance_. There
is also a letter from the _Contrôleur des Finances d’Égypte_. He
complains bitterly of the difficulty in levying the taxes, and the
stubbornness of the Turks, who, sooner than pay will submit to stripes
and even death. These letters and many private ones are to be made
public and commented on by the mild spirit of Mr. Gifford.[56] They
will be published in a few days, before the meeting of Parliament, in
order to give the proper cue to those country members whose warlike
spirits may have been subdued at the sight of the universal suffering
throughout the country--a suffering aggravated, if not caused, by the
horrors of war.

There can be nothing more contemptible than the personal pique all
Ministerial people seem to feel towards him. The object in publishing
these letters is merely to gall him by an expression or two, and for
this gratification they shabbily put in the names of individuals, which
may be the means of much private ruin. They say, ‘Aye, this will do him
up!’

[Sidenote: LORD ANDOVER’S DEATH]

Poor Ld. Andover![57] Unfortunately, in giving his gun to his groom
the piece went off, and the whole contents were lodged in his body:
he retained his senses 7 hours after the accident, and died shortly
after. His wretched wife! What must her feelings be! Each most tenderly
attached to the other. It is the only tie which when dissolved makes
the vast world a wilderness. How can piety, fortitude, or reason bear
up against such a dreadful calamity? Indeed, one cannot wish it should
prolong the existence of the miserable relict. That direful separation
alone can shake the love of life so deeply rooted in us all. Canning
says Ld. Andover used to remind him of Ld. H. at times. Great heavens!
how far beyond a remedy must be her sorrows. Without knowing any of the
parties, the despair of the situation quite overcomes me, and draws
tears of unfeigned pity from my eyes; how fortunate for her should she
never awaken to her wretchedness, but die in the agonies of delirium.
Oh! in mercy let such be my close if I am doomed to the--oh! I cannot
with calmness suppose the case.

Ye Friday party[58] did very well, dissimilar as are the opinions of
the parties. On Saturday Ld. Wycombe brought a Spaniard,[59] who is
just come from Paris, and is in England without the knowledge and
against the consent of the Ministers. He has resided in Paris during
the last four years, and he has adopted the principles of Revolution
_con amore_. He calls the Church Establishment an infamous
institution, and appears quite ripe to back his principles by his
practice.

Mr. Fox was persuaded to come and attend the House of Commons on the
day the subject of the negotiations was discussed. He always must speak
well, but I should have preferred an oratorical, philosophical survey
of the events that had arisen during the secession to a mere debating
speech, which he made.

The intercepted letters are published with a preface avowedly by
Canning; the notes are certainly by another hand. During the debate
which Mr. Fox attended Canning launched out with his usual flippancy
of tongue against the D. of Bedford, and said he would not lose his
time in replying to arguments brought forward from a man of _such_
an intellect. Fox gave him the retort _un_courteous and made the
little great man shrink. In going out he asked him if he seriously
thought he could persuade the country that the D. of B. was an idiot.
‘No, I don’t; but why did he attack my publication?’ ‘My publication!’
And such a thing it is; the prophecies announcing the Messiah could not
usher him in with more awful pomp than he does these letters to the
notice of the public.

[Sidenote: LORD KING]

It was lucky that the first time Mr. Fox heard his nephew speak,
should be when he spoke the best. Tho’ his terror was excessive, yet
he possessed himself, and made upon the subject of the negotiation a
very able speech. On the Dutch inquiry, moved by Ld. H., Ld. King spoke
uncommonly well. Ld. H. was the more pleased, as it was merely out of
friendship to him that he prevailed upon himself to conquer his dread
of addressing a public assembly. He is a very young man, very handsome,
very awkward, and very shy, but very full of most excellent qualities.
He is a good son, a warm and generous friend. His principles, political
and religious, are inimical to the actual state of those in force. The
first are moderated: he was a lover of liberty even to democracy, and
still abhors religion to impiety, but the experience that has corrected
him of one excess will cure him of the other, and doubtless he will
become very like other people.

When the division was coming on, Ld. Liverpool and Ld. Malmesbury
and many others called out, ‘Pooh, pooh! you won’t divide! Why, you
will have but three. Pooh, pooh! Don’t think of it!’ ‘Aye, but I will
divide!’ cried Ld. H. ‘If I am single I will have a division’; when, to
his great surprise and pleasure, the Duke of Somerset and Ld. Mansfield
divided with him, besides King and Bessborough. Ld. Camelford did the
same, but pique against Ld. Grenville explains his conduct.

From several conversations I had alone this summer with the D. of
Somerset I collected that he was, tho’ not disposed towards Opposition,
yet averse to Ministers. He is a sensible man, inclined to act upon
his own judgment: his manner, from shyness, is against him. I suspect
that he has a love of fun in him, for he told me that he was occupied
in persuading Lewis to write a book on moral philosophy, as he was
certain from the opinions he heard from Lewis that it would be at least
entertaining. ‘For,’ says he, ‘he calls _virtues_ what the world
holds in abhorrence as great vices, and these paradoxes he maintains
so strangely that I cannot illustrate them stronger than by telling
you that he confesses himself surprised that Wilberforce should have
published his book after _The Monk_. He thinks it great want of
taste to give a system of morality in a dry, forbidding form, whereas
“_mine_ is given in a popular, pleasing manner, which diverts
whilst it instructs, annner to upbraid him for his vote the night
before, but hed is adapted to every capacity.”’ Yesterday when he
came in to dinner Lds. Boringdon and Amherst lifted up their hands in
a ma rather showed an unwillingness to be tutored. Again, during a
dinner, Ld. B. leant across me to tell him he was a rival to Julian.
I immediately said, ‘I see no apostasy in being guided by good sense
and not biassed by interest.’ Ld. B. said no more, and the Duke looked
thanks for the reproof. Again Ld. B. asked how he meant to vote upon a
question which is coming on. The question is improper to ask, and the
Duke replied very well, ‘I shall decide when I hear the arguments on
both sides.’

We had a numerous party; Sir James St. Clair is lately returned from
Minorca, of which place he gives but a sorry account. His wife is
handsome; she did not love him when they first married, but his good
nature has conquered her dislike, and she is almost in love with him.
In most marriages a material change occurs in the course of ten years,
but she has the merit of _singularity_ in hers. Ld. Lorne is an
old favourite of mine; his good humour, cheerfulness, and ease is quite
charming. Lewis’ lines in an epilogue to _Barbarossa_, which they
acted at Inverary, are very descriptive of him:--

    And Lord Lorne’s easy air, when he got in a passion,
    Proved a tyrant must needs be a person of fashion.
    He seemed much at home through the whole of the play;
    He died in a style that was quite _dégagé_.
    And his orders for murder, disclosed by their tone,
    ’Twas the same if he gave them or let them alone.

_14th Feb., 1800._--Bob Heathcote came for the first time. ‘A
fool and his money are soon parted.’ Most of his is squandered at the
gaming table, Newmarket, rare editions, sums lent to ----, splendid
dinners, and, in short, in every way that it can go. He is, however,
very good-natured, and not conceited--merits that cover a thousand
blemishes, and in society make up for most deficiencies.

[Sidenote: MR. KINNAIRD]

A few days back Mr. Kinnaird,[60] eldest son of Ld. Kinnaird, dined
here for the first time. Being a Scotchman and having studied in a
Scotch University, report puffs him high, of course. Tho’ it overdoes
his deserts, yet he merits some praise. He is clever and willing to
please; one cannot pity him for _shyness_, as he labours under
no embarrassment upon that score. Living in the world will set his
head right and render him useful. He is an eager politician against
Ministers.

Ld. H. is gone down to the H. of Lords, as a message from the King
to subsidise the _German_ Princes is before the House. It is
conjectured that our magnanimous ally, the Imperial Paul, is deserting
the cause he espoused so vehemently; whilst we are to continue fighting
until ‘experience and the evidence of facts’ render a peace proper with
Bonaparte. One of the finest passages in Mr. Fox’s speech was where he
took up the expression of those who gave for reason the not negotiating
immediately, that ‘we should _pause_.’ He described with energy
the calamities of war, the villages sacked, cattle destroyed, the field
of battle covered with agonised victims weltering in their blood, who,
if questioned as to the cause they were fighting in, could not answer
as in other wars, ‘ambition,’ ‘aggrandisement of territory,’ etc.,
etc. ‘No, we fight because the English Ministers are doubtful as to
the moral qualities of Bonaparte.’

Lord Carlisle is mightily disposed to vote against the Ministers, a
propensity which gives his son great alarm, as he is riveted to all the
dogmas of the Ministerial creed, the necessity of the war, faith in the
prowess of Suwarrow, the infallibility of Mr. Pitt, etc., etc.

General Fitzpatrick has published his letters to Lord Kenyon.[61]
Previous to doing so he sent them to the King, accompanied by a letter
calculated to delight him, appealing to him as the head of the school
of honour and chief among gentlemen. The motto to the publication
is very happy; it is taken from Kenyon’s own speech on the trial of
Horne Tooke in 1792: ‘Mr. Horne Tooke, I cannot sit here to hear names
calumniated and vilified, persons who are not in this case, persons
who are absent, and cannot defend themselves. A Court of Justice is no
place for calumny. You must see the impropriety of it, and it does not
become the feelings of an honourable mind.’

I heard of a great trait of Scotch nationality. At a dinner at the
Chief Baron’s,[62] where Sylvester Douglas[63] was, the news, just then
fresh, of Bonaparte’s seizure of the Governt. was mentioned, upon
which both the Scotchmen at the same moment inquired, ‘And what did
Macdonald[64] do?’

[Sidenote: THE PRINCE’S HEALTH]

The Prince of Wales is supposed to be dying: whatever his illness may
be besides, revived love for Mrs. Fitzherbert has aggravated and added
to the measure of it. Mde. de Coigny says it’s like a _rondeau_,
in which variations are made _ad libitum_, but the return is to
the first air. He had a numerous dinner last week, composed solely of
parsons; whether this was fun or fear is uncertain. If he had been in
a vein for the former, it might have been indulged, as no set of men
abhor each other with more heartfelt hatred than those pious brethren;
each is in the way of the other, like an overloaded market in Bengal of
English beauties. The other night at D. House he fell back in his chair
and pointed to have his neckcloth loosened; fortunately Farquhar was
there, and ordered proper remedies for his recovery.

The French have played a very good trick in return for our publishing
the intercepted letters. They pretend to have found hidden in the
wall of a house belonging to a Chouan chief, letters written by Pitt,
Windham, etc., to recommend the Royalists to make peace with the
Republicans at any rate, and then break it when the English succours
arrive. This may be a _real_ correspondence, but if not, _è bene
trovato_.

Menzini,[65] the satirist, was derided for his poverty by an insolent
and haughty Cardinal, who from his balcony perceived him walking,
shabbily dressed. The Cardinal expressed his contempt in the lines of
Petrarch:--

    Povera e nuda vai Filosofia.

Menzini, with great quickness, replied by the next line of the poet:--

    Dice la turba al vil guadagno intesa.

Caraccioli said of England, ‘Que c’était un pays où il y avoit mille
religions, et qu’une sauce.’

M. de Lauragais[66] said of it, ‘Qu’il n’y avoit rien de poli que
l’acier, point de fruits mûrs que les pommes cuites.’

_1st March, 1800._--Within these last ten or twelve days Mrs.
Beauclerk and Mrs. Smith have each added their individual contributions
to the population of the world: a little Mimi, and a still smaller boy
are the production.

[Sidenote: COMTE D’ARTOIS]

Tierney told me of a circumstance which had been conveyed to him
_from authority_. At one of the dinners given by the Comte
d’Artois to Pitt and the Cabinet Ministers, the Cte. expressed his
astonishment and indignation _to_ Pitt, that a man possessing such
principles as Mr. Tierney does, and uttering all that his turbulent
and discontented disposition gives rise to, was allowed to go about;
that such a man in a well-regulated Governt. should be confined, and
not allowed to be at large to preach politics. Pitt replied that
Mr. Tierney was a member of Parliament, a very loyal subject, and
respectable in his private character. This was said drily, and intended
as a reproof to a very ill-judged question. Nothing could show a
greater want of taste and knowledge of English customs, than to abuse
a member of Parliament to the Prime Minister of England, and tho’ I
would not detract from Mr. Pitt, yet his defence of Tierney was such
as the occasion extorted, and ought to have been made for any man in
Parliament who has not outraged the laws. Even Sir Francis Burdett is
as yet entitled to a similar justification. The Cte. d’Artois (at
present, according to the _ancien régime_, Monsieur) is a man of
slender abilities with violent passions; before the Revolution he was
weak and volatile, he is now weak and revengeful.

Bonaparte gives fresh proofs every day of his talents for governing,
both in his disposition to conciliate and resist. He has issued letters
to recall most of the emigrant nobles who have not borne arms against
their country, infants, women, and priests; he manifests a strong
determination to fight as well as he did formerly, and not allow of
anything being wrested from the nation.

There is upon record a very curious fact, that well considered might
abate the ardour of those who are disposed to fight on for the
Restoration ‘of the line of Hereditary Princes,’ as it shows that that
event would not in all probability induce France to fall back within
her ancient limits--one of the objects proposed by the restoration of
ye Bourbons. Upon the restoration of Charles II., the Spaniards applied
to the English Court for the surrender of Jamaica, upon the ground of
its being conquered by an usurper.[67] The English Ministers submitted
the question to the ablest civilians in the country, and they were
unanimous in their opinion that whatever conquest had been achieved
by the arms of G. Britain, whether under lawful or usurped authority,
_that_ acquisition, once annexed and become an integral part of
the Dominion, it was safe to maintain even by force of arms. And can
it seriously be supposed, first, that the French nation will ever
receive a Monarch forced upon them at the point of the bayonet by the
allied armies, knowing that the incentive that provokes those allies is
the partition of France? And, 2ndly, admitting the restoration were
practicable, would the Kings, whose object would be popularity, venture
to dismember their country? Why, even the unhappy emigrants, starving
and exiled, feel triumph and exultation at every victory obtained by
their countrymen.

Washington died towards the close of the year 1799. His name will
stand high in the page of history, and posterity will be apt to
outstep truth to bestow enthusiastic eulogy upon him, who has been
great from his mediocrity. Mankind delight in assigning deep designs
to very obvious facts. We shall hear of his being the first among
generals, legislators, patriots, and practical philosophers, of his
integrity, his disinterestedness in sacrificing to the public, of his
well understood ambition in preferring a _splendid obscurity_ to
elevated insignificancy; in short, what will not be said except the
truth--a plain, painstaking, plodding man, whose profession of land
surveyor taught him a smattering of mixed mathematics which became
useful when military positions were to be conceived, a mild, even
temper, that neither offended nor captivated. So much will be said,
and hitherto so little has been said, that I shall wait and hear. All
France and America mourned at his death.

Canning sent to beg we would fix a day that he might dine here. He
came, we had only Lds. G. Leveson, Boringdon, and Ly. Bess. Went off
very agreeably. He was witty upon the new Institution,[68] which is a
very bad imitation of the _Institut_ at Paris; hitherto there is
only one Professor, who is a jack-of-all-trades, as he lectures alike
upon chemistry and shipbuilding.

[Sidenote: HORNE TOOKE’S ELECTION]

When Horne Tooke harangued the electors of Westminster from the
hustings he was often put out by one of the mob closing his sentences
with a nasal ‘Amen.’ This ridiculous finale did him more mischief
than all the arguments of his adversaries to prove his incapacity, on
account of having taken Priest’s orders, and now the Bishop of London
refuses to induct him because he is a layman. He is ingenious enough, I
doubt not, to reconcile these seeming contradictions.[69]

Hare, joking with Ld. H. upon his small divisions, some of which have
been composed of Ld. King and himself only, says he ought to say, ‘Ego
et _Rex_ meus.’

Marquis de la Rivière[70] has with a degree of superabundant loyal
zeal, vexed me. At dinner here he overheard me telling Calonne the
story of the Cte. d’Artois asking Pitt why a man like Tierney was
not shut up. He straight went and asked Monsieur if it was true;
he, of course, said _no_, and contradicted it plump. This
contradiction Rivière believes implicitly, and wrote me a formal
denial of the charge. This provokes me, as I hate being made a party
in a _tracasserie_, and still more hate having named any person.
However, the thing is of no importance, because I certainly credit
Tierney’s statement in preference to Monsieur’s asseveration to the
contrary.

I was childish enough last night to go and see the new play; it was
almost my first _sortie_ from my couch, but I am not punished for
the imprudence, as I have been perfectly well all day. I found Lewis in
my box; he is the only person I give leave to enter at all times. He
was just returned from Cambridge, where he had heard Ld. Henry Petty
deliver a declamation, composed in the very best taste, full of feeling
and ingenuity.

I have been reading Le Brun’s journey to Persepolis in 1704, the ruins
of which (Persepolis) seem equal to anything of antiquity in point of
solidity, size, and extent.

In future times when this little island shall have fallen into its
natural insignificancy, by being no longer possessed of a fictitious
power founded upon commerce, distant colonies, and other artificial
sources of wealth, how puzzled will the curious antiquary be when
seeking amidst the ruins of London vestiges of its past grandeur? Acres
now covered by high, thin walls of brick, making streets _tirés à
cordon_, divided into miserable, straitened, scanty houses, will,
when decayed, crumble into a vast heap of brick-dust. No proud arch
to survive the records of history, no aqueduct to prove how much the
public was considered by ye Governt., no lofty temples, no public
works! St. Paul’s anywhere would be a grand edifice; finer as a ruin
than in its present state, disfigured with casements, whitewashed
walls, pews, etc. The bridges alone would strike the eye as fine
remains; they are magnificent. The reason of the meanness of everything
throughout England proceeds from two causes. One is the scantiness of
materials for great works, viz., stone and marble; second is, that
commerce begets independence, from whence springs selfishness and the
wish to enjoy what you acquire. Hence there is no ambition, no desire
of perpetuating by great works fame to posterity.

[Sidenote: THE HUMANITARIANS]

Hobhouse,[71] who dined here last week for the first time, is a
leading man among the Dissenters. He and Mr. Wm. Smith have written
controversial books, and he has distinguished his own sect by the
denomination of _Humanitarians_, not to be confounded with
Unitarians. Priestley, in fact, is the founder of their doctrines,
which doctrines they say are drawn from the New Testament in conformity
with the primitive practice of Christianity. They assert that most
points of faith in the Established Church proceed from the corruptions
of Christianity. Christ they believe to have been the son of Joseph
and Mary, but that he became inspired by a divine gift. They deny
the Trinity, original sin, and the soul; their paradise is composed
of material objects, not admitting the separation of soul and body.
The Bible they hold to be an historical chronicle, Moses merely a
legislator, the Prophets inspired darkly announcing Christ.

Sheridan by chance dined here on Friday, with a whole troop of
Frenchmen. I was afraid he would be annoyed, as he does not speak
French (which is the strangest thing imaginable for a man in his
situation), but he, on the contrary, was pleased with his party. The
company were ye Archevêque de Bordeaux, Calonne, Rivière, and Mr.
Lattin. He was diverted at seeing the Archevêque laugh heartily at some
sallies which might have shocked a bigot or a prude.

Crébillon Père, when upon his deathbed, sent for his son. ‘Ah! mon
fils, est-ce donc bien vrai que vous soyez un de ces philosophes à
la mode, qui veulent le bouleversement de la religion?’ He drew from
behind his pillow a crucifix, and pointing to it, ‘Vous voulez donc
détruire ce qu’il lui a tant coûté pour établir?’ This story Condorcet
used to be very fond of telling.

Lady Ann Hatton speculates upon marrying Lord Abercorn. Lady
Bessborough, who is all credulity, believes _de bonne foi_ that
this marriage will take place; even I, who am incredulous, have doubts
in his favour, provided what I am told is true, such as, that Ld.
A. has taken his daughters to visit their future mother. Beauclerk
thinks Ly. Ann dreams, and imparts the vision to Lady B. for facts.
Ld. Morpeth behaves admirably, but has wisely not given in a _contre
projet_ to the project upon the _tapis_. For a moment I thought
the marriage story with Ld. A. was a scheme to obtain a real one from
him, but _nous verrons_. Tho’ I do not particularly like Ly. Ann,
I shall be glad to see her rescued from the humiliating state she is
in; neglect, poverty, and discredit are horrid sufferances. If she
closes her career with one of the greatest matches in the kingdom, I
don’t know how young women will credit wise precepts of ‘virtue alone
is rewarded,’ etc. She is 36, her appearance is so youthful that no
one guesses her to be above 24, if so much. Her figure is light, airy,
and graceful; Hare says she has a sort of vivacity that raises your
expectations, but what she says is so flat that it damps curiosity.

Bonaparte allows of the return of the emigrants; I almost fear he
extends that indulgence too far. Once restored to their possessions
they will long for their titles, and a King will be the fountain of
honour. The Duc de Liancourt has obtained all his estates which were
not sold, and those of the Duc de la Rochefoucauld; this makes him
among the number of the richest individuals in Europe.[72]

[Sidenote: TALLEYRAND’S SARCASMS]

A very profligate man, who was an agent of the Duc de Richelieu in all
his vicious debaucheries, said in a company one day where Talleyrand
(L’Évêque d’Autun) was, how much he was injured by the calumnies
propagated against him, ‘Et vraiment je n’ai jamais fait qu’une
méchanceté de ma vie.’ Talleyrand, with calm indifference, replied, ‘Et
quand finira-t-elle?’ I rather think the man’s name was Rulhière.[73]

Talleyrand is remarkable for his cold sarcasms. When M. de Narbonne
was Minister at War, Mde. de Staël was his protecting mistress, she
guided everything; and one day at a Council of War, at which, very
improperly, she was present, each Minister gave their opinion upon the
different projects proposed for the plan of attack by some generals.
She delivered, among the rest, hers with great warmth and decision;
when she had finished she turned to Talleyrand, and said, ‘Why, you do
not say a word! What do you think?’ He coldly replied, ‘C’est que je
ne m’y entends nullement dans les affaires militaires.’ This bitter
reproof vexed her to a degree of passion that she burst into tears; she
merited the chastisement, for ‘qu’avait-elle à faire dans ce galère-là?’

An excellent pamphlet, called _Observations upon the Preface to
the intercepted correspondence_, contains some witty and severe
strictures upon Canning’s highly absurd arguments contained in said
preface. It has been imputed to Grey, Lds. Wycombe, Holland, and to
Tierney. Ld. H. admired it so much that his uncle Fitzpatrick said he
could not resist telling him it was his, but it is a profound secret.

Mr. Fox is employed in writing the history of some late period in the
British annals, but whether King William’s reign or Charles II., I am
not certain, but I rather believe the latter.[74] I sent him by his
desire some books upon the subject, Ld. Grey’s narrative of the Rye
House Plot, Baxter’s _Life_ of himself, and I have proposed to him
various other miscellaneous tracts. A philosophical history from such
a pen will be beyond praise, but I much fear his habitual indolence
will interfere too much to allow a shadow of hope that he will finish a
section even.

Ld. H. has a quality in common with him that is very serviceable in
many ways--a great enduring patience in listening to the arguments of
any fool, however great, and of always doing his best to answer them;
of never allowing himself to feel, ‘Why exert myself for this fellow?’
Fox says he always likes to hear the opinion of a fool, as he gets by
it two opinions, that of the person who gave him the opinion, and his
own as he adopts it.

General Smith lost a great deal of money at Brookes’; to dissipate
his chagrin he walked about the room, and at length joined in a
conversation upon religion. ‘For my part,’ said he, ‘I cannot
understand what they mean with their _Trinity_ and _Holy
Ghost_.’ ‘I wonder at that,’ replied General Fitzpatrick, ‘as the
symbol is a pigeon.’

[Sidenote: GENERAL FITZPATRICK]

The General is less remarkable for brilliant repartees than Hare, but
all he says shows a profound knowledge of the world, life, manners,
and character; his observations are mostly just and expressed in the
best and purest language, adorned with an undescribable good taste. His
conversation and writings remind me of Addison. Leave out the morality
and piety, and the two characters are the same: mild, gentlemanlike,
and each possessing chaste humour. The General is by far the better
poet of the two. I am told that my taste is corrupted by that which
prevails, but I think energy of expression is oftentimes wanting in
both of the above styles.

North,[75] the Bishop of Winchester’s son, Ld. H.’s old friend, brought
his wife to dine here some days ago. She is pretty rather, but looks
sour-tempered.

Bread is 17 pence the quartern loaf, coals six guineas the chaldron,
turkeys 16 shillings, capons 8s. 6d., meat dearer than usual. During
this scarcity, be it natural or artificial, we adopt the regulations
of the H. of Lords; each person in the family is limited to a quartern
loaf per week, no pastry, no fine bread for breakfast.

_19th March, 1800._--A satirical poem called _The Campaign_
is just published; it abuses the Duke of York and the Dutch Expedition.
It is imputed to Mr. Courtenay,[76] an old member of Opposition, a
man of great coarseness, but some wit. In the House of Commons some
supporter of Mr. Pitt’s Administration complimented him on having
conducted the machine of Government with such success, in spite of the
_drag chain_ of Opposition. Mr. Courtenay, in his reply, remarked
upon the beauty and correctness of ye metaphor, since the machine was
confessedly going downhill.

_22nd March._--Erskine and Mr. Lattin (and a foolish, handsome
Irishman, Mr. Henry) dined, and were extremely entertaining yesterday.
Erskine, I have always found hitherto far from agreeable, but yesterday
was an exception. He talked strangely upon religion; he pretends to
Christianity, but the Mother Church would not take him into her bosom.
Bishops and churches, he declares, have destroyed true religion;
had he the power of Christ he would drive the _doctors_ out
of the _Temple_ as he did, and out of Lincoln’s Inn besides.
The Church Establishment he maintains to be the total ruin of the
simple, primitive worship. The Trinity he explains with ingenuity,
and reprobates the Incomprehensible Mystery of three separate and
individual persons.

The little Monk Lewis has behaved like a great fool, and made himself
highly ridiculous. He sent to the Duke of Somerset and desired he would
_wait upon him_ the next day at 1 o’clock. The Duke obeyed the
summons, and _did wait_ upon him. ‘I understand, D. of Somerset,
that you have exposed me to the contempt of being again blackballed by
the New Club. I think the part you have acted by so doing unbecoming
the character of a friend; thus I desire our acquaintance may drop
here.’ He rung the bell, and bid the servant open the door for the D.,
and thus dismissed him. The D. of S. is remarkably good-natured, and
most certainly did what he thought Lewis would like, but, poor little
man, he is very irritable and quarrelsome, and will shortly be left not
only friendless, but without many acquaintances.

[Sidenote: THE ROYAL INSTITUTION]

This Institution[77] of Rumford’s furnishes ridiculous stories. The
other day they tried the effect of the gas, so poetically described
by Beddoes; it exhilarates the spirits, distends the vessels, and,
in short, gives life to the whole machine. The first subject was a
corpulent, middle-aged gentleman, who, after inhaling a sufficient
dose, was requested to describe to the company his sensations; ‘Why,
I only feel stupid.’ This intelligence was received amidst a burst
of applause, most probably not for the novelty of the information.
Sir Coxe Hippisley was the next who submitted to the operation, but
the _effect_ upon him was so _animating_ that the ladies
tittered, held up their hands, and declared themselves satisfied. The
experiment to remove the popular prejudice in favour of silver teapots
failed, as the thermometer gave the lie to the Professor’s learned
dissertations, but it must have been from the malice of his evil
genius, for the fact is in his favour.

The Bishop of Killala’s[78] narrative of what passed in the town and
neighbouring district whilst the French were in possession of it in ’98
under Humbert, is extremely interesting. It is written simply, with a
great appearance of truth and feeling. His palace was the headquarters
of the General and his officers. He speaks with highest admiration of
their humanity, civility, and incredible discipline. There is even
humour in his description of some of the scenes, particularly that
in which he describes the mixture of mirth and contempt with which
the French officer thrust indiscriminately upon the noddles of the
Irish the gaudy helmets. He yields the palm of superiority to the
English for their _dexterity_ in pillaging and in plunder; indeed
compared with every European army, save the Papal one, it is the only
_excellence_ in candour we can admit them to lay claim to.

Great embarkations are making at Plymouth of the Guards and other
troops. Their destination is not known, but rumour says they go to the
Mediterranean. Were I not satisfied how _harmless_ an English
military force is against an enemy in battle array, I should wish
contrary winds to waft them leagues out of their course, if they are
destined for Egypt; but they inspire as little alarm to their enemies
as they do confidence in their countrymen, for they are, as one of
their commanders in Ireland said publicly of them, ‘Formidable only to
their friends.’

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: PICTURES BY VAN DYKE]

This house[79] has contained many remarkable and interesting persons;
there are curious stories about its origin. Some say it was a nunnery,
others, that it was built by a _Cope_ in the reign of Philip
and Mary. It came by marriage into the possession of Rich, Earl of
Holland.[80] He was a most accomplished and gallant cavalier, and so
amiable that Charles I. conceived a jealousy against him, probably not
totally without foundation. In consequence of this he was confined
by order to his house, but his Royal mistress refused to cohabit
with the King until her favourite chamberlain was at large. During
his residence here Van Dyke passed a year with him, and probably
painted some of those portraits which now decorate most of the best
collections in England.[81] There is a very fine portrait of ye Earl
of Holland, done by this celebrated artist, in the possession of Lord
Breadalbane, at Taymouth.[82] It represents him in the prime and beauty
of manhood, arrayed in the apparel of a bridegroom, such as he was when
he represented his Royal Master at the Court of France to the lovely
Henrietta Maria. His left leg is covered with white satin, it being the
one put into bed to the bride when Royal marriages are made by proxy.
He held employments of considerable trust, but was accounted wavering
in his politics and irritable in his temper. He retired here just when
the Civil war broke out, in disgust. Clarendon says, ‘He was visited by
all the disaffected Members of Parliament, who held frequent meetings
at Holland House.’ Some time after, when the Civil war was at its
height, he offered to join the King’s party at Oxford, but being coldly
received he returned to the Parliament forces. On 6th August, 1647,
‘The Members of Parliament who were driven from Westminster by tumult
met General Fairfax at Holland House and subscribed to the declaration
of the Army, etc.’[83] Some ascribe his desertion of the Royal cause
to his hatred of Ld. Strafford. He gave a proof of his wish to restore
it; in consequence of which he was taken prisoner, confined to his
house, and dragged to execution the 9th of March, 1648–9. His body
is buried in Kensington Church. In the July following, Lambert, then
General of the army, fixed his headquarters here. It was restored to
the family of Rich. When the Puritans shut up public theatres, the
actors used to act at the houses of the nobility, and this house is
mentioned as having frequently been the scene of much dramatic mirth
and festivity.

[Sidenote: ADDISON]

Addison was tutor to the Earl of Warwick.[84] He married the Countess,
his mother, a marriage which made no addition to his happiness; it
neither found them nor made them equal. She always remembered her own
rank, and thought herself entitled to treat with very little ceremony
the tutor of her son. Rowe’s ballad of despairing love is said to have
been written either before or after marriage upon this memorable pair,
and it is certain Addison has left behind him no encouragement for
ambitious love. There is a pretty little poem by Rowe upon the occasion
of his first visit to Holland House to see the Countess of Warwick.
It is said by some author, “Holland House is a large mansion, but
could not contain Mr. Addison, the Countess of Warwick, and one guest,
Peace.” During his residence here the house was frequented by the wits
and poets of the time, Pope, Tickell, Steele. Upon his deathbed he sent
for Gay, with whom he had had little previous intercourse. He told him
he had injured him, but would recompense him if he recovered: ‘What the
injury was, he did not explain.’ Lord Warwick was a disorderly young
man, and had received without heed the advice of Addison, who used his
utmost to reclaim his morals and mend his life; when he found himself
dying he sent for him, ‘That he might see how a Christian can die.’[85]
He expired under this roof in 1719.

    Thou hill, whose brow the antique structures grace
    Rear’d by bold chiefs of Warwick’s noble race,
    Why, once so loved, whene’er thy bower appears,
    O’er my dim eyeballs glance the sudden tears!
    How sweet were once thy prospects fresh and fair,
    Thy sloping walks and unpolluted air!
    How sweet the glooms beneath thy aged trees,
    Thy noontide shadows, and thy evening breeze!
    His image thy forsaken bowers restore;
    Thy walks and airy prospects charm no more;
    No more the summer in thy glooms allay’d
    Thy evening breezes, and thy noonday shade.

    _Tickell, on the death of Addison._

And again in his _Kensington Garden_:--

    Where now the skies high Holland House invades
    And short-lived Warwick sadden’d all the shades.

Johnson repeats with great indignation Mandeville’s observation upon
Addison. It was that he appeared to him like a parson in a tye wig: a
laughable and, I daresay, a true remark.

In 1762, Henry Fox, Secretary of State (afterwards Lord Holland),
inhabited, and shortly after purchased this house.[86] During his life
it was frequently the resort of the great politicians. Sir Robert
Walpole, unless he died before, was certainly a frequent visitor, at
least he was a friend; Lds. Bute and Chatham, etc. Lady Sarah Lennox
resided with her sister Ly. H.[87] at the period of the present King’s
love, a love that might have elevated her to the throne, but for her
levity and total disregard for appearances. Both Ld. and Ly. Holland
died here. During his long illness he one day forbade admittance to
all his friends who might call, with the exception only of George
Selwyn, ‘For if I am alive I shall be very happy to see him, and if I
am dead he will be very glad to see me,’ alluding to George Selwyn’s
extraordinary passion for beholding death in any shape. He rarely
missed the sight of an execution. He was supposed to have incensed
George II. extremely by having indulged this curiosity about Queen
Caroline, to obtain a sight of whose corpse he concealed himself under
the bed, and during the absence at night of the attendants examined the
body. George II. had such an aversion to him that he always called him
‘_That rascal George_.’ Selwyn once overheard him and exclaimed,
‘What can that mean? Rascal! Oh! I forgot that it was a hereditary
title of the Georges.’ The King (George III.) the year after he had
been at G. Selwyn’s house at Matson (famous in history for the escape
of Charles I.) went mad. G. Selwyn upon this observed, ‘that it was odd
enough that the only two Kings that had visited Matson had _both
lost their heads_.’

[Sidenote: LORD ABERCORN’S MARRIAGE]

This singular marriage of Lady Ann’s is going on rapidly, nay, the
nuptials are to take place in the course of this week; but till the
holy knot is tied, I confess such mystery hangs upon the affair that I
shall continue withholding my full belief. He consults Ly. B. about the
equipages, fêtes that are to be given upon the occasion, etc., and yet
insists upon her keeping her promise of secrecy, and even goes so far
as to beg she will contradict the report if she hears it. He was always
supposed to be a little cracked, and his pride is beyond belief. When
travelling in Italy during the life of his uncle and he was only Mr.
Hamilton, to distinguish himself he left upon his cards, ‘D’Hamilton,
Comte Héréditaire d’Abercorn.’ His language is so _outré_ from
the manners of common life that it would appear caricatured and
_chargé’d_ even upon the stage. Should the union really take
place, the first step will be a rupture between Ly. Ann, his daughters,
and Miss Copley their aunt, as Ly. A. is both violent and peevish, and
little disposed to submit to the _gêne_ of _bienséance_ with
regard to them.

I hear from my dear Webby frequently. The others I know are well, but
poor Harriet is placed in a cheap school, and will be educated among
people and with ideas that certainly are not adapted to her way of life
I hope and trust in future.

_17th April, 1800._--Abbé de Lille to-day shone. He aimed not at
proving himself a political prophet: he contented himself with being
a pleasant companion and a poet unique. In conversation he was very
amusing; he told several stories about Voltaire, with whom he had been
intimate in the early part of his life. The Collège de Montaigne was
remarkable for its filthiness; the _régent_ of it, when the _écoliers_
were to act a play, was puzzled at their choice. It was _Mérope_. The
female name offended him, and he altered it to _Méropus_: upon which
Voltaire said it was in compliment of the place to call it _Mère au
puce_, it being the _foyer_ of dirt. Necker’s conduct in France, he
said, was exactly like that of a _Curé_, who at a jovial dinner heard
the bell ringing to Vespers, upon which he immediately chanted the
Psalm of _Deus in adjutorium meum intende_, etc.; the people made
the response _Gloria Patri et Filio et Spiritui sancto_; a man next
to the _Curé_ gave him a _soufflet_, saying if he had not begun the
people would not have sung. The application to Necker was that he first
sounded the alarm and roused the people of France. At the beginning of
the Revolution, when things that now seem insignificant were looked
upon as of great importance, two men were overheard talking of the
calamities of the country in the Thuileries. One said, ‘Ah! bon Dieu,
c’est la fin du monde.’ ‘Bah! bah!’ replied the other, ‘Comment donc,
Monsr., il y a des exemples?’

He recited his translation of the fourth book of the _Aeneid_; the
tender passages prove his ignorance of the sentiment he expresses. The
famous tirade is admirably rendered.

[Sidenote: LORD ABERCORN’S MARRIAGE]

Lord Abercorn’s singular union has at length taken place contrary to
every plausible speculation. A few days before it was declared he
confided to a friend his intended marriage, without naming the lady.
‘The world will be surprised, do not contradict the report, nor deny
it.’ As soon as the event was public the Queen sent Ly. Ely to Miss
Copley[88] to desire her to come to Buckingham House. ‘I hear that in
consequence of this business, that you intend quitting Ld. A.’s house;
remember, Miss Copley, that the worse the affair is, the stronger is
the necessity of continuing with your nieces, and remember you have my
advice and sanction.’ This maternal, majestic speech had its effect.
Sir Lionel Copley told me both of these anecdotes.

The day of the marriage Ly. A. was sitting with Ly. Bess. talking of
the event that was fixed for 8 o’clock in the ensuing eve., when their
conversation was interrupted by the entrance of the porter to inform
them, ‘That Lord Abercorn had just called and left word that Ly. Ann
must make haste, as she was to be married at 4.’ This intelligence
_so_ communicated surprised them, but compliance and punctuality
are indispensable qualities where Ld. A. is concerned, therefore they
obeyed. As soon as the ceremony was over, which was performed at Lord
Sudley’s,[89] Ld. A. made the Marchioness a low bow, handed his eldest
daughter out to his carriage, and went and dined with his own family,
whilst the Marchioness went and dined in Cavendish Square. He came with
a cavalcade of servants and _flambeaux_ to bear off his prize to
the Priory.

He is haughty and capricious, with enough of vanity to make him do a
generous action, and with a dash of madness to make him do a lively
one. Ly. Bess. went down for a few days; she described an evening
between the new married pair, which was an exact reproduction of a
scene in _The Taming of the Shrew_. To cure a headache he made her
play blindman’s buff, and the more she complained the more violent he
made the sport. A person remarked the livery, which is the same as the
younger branches of the Royal Family, and said, ‘I suppose your family
took it from them.’ ‘My family took it from them? No, it was the livery
of the Hamiltons before the House of Brunswick had a servant to put it
on.’ When he told the Dowager Lady Warwick that Sir Wm. Hamilton (her
brother) was to marry Mrs. Hart, and that _he_ should give her
away, she said it was a disgrace to the family, but if done by any of
them the deed was fitted to the one who had the blot in his escutcheon
and a crack in his skull.

The Duke of Somerset is to marry Ly. Charlotte Hamilton;[90] his mother
withholds her consent. She is much older than the Duke. Her superior
coquetry has obtained the palm, for his love began with her younger
sister, Lady Susan.

A circumstance, half ridiculous, half distressing, embarrassed me last
Saturday at Lansdown House. I met an old lover whom I had not set eyes
on for 14 years; the last time I beheld him was when he solicited an
interview to propose marriage. His mode of making the overture was
singular at least. He began by approaching his chair close to mine,
and followed this close-quartering with an endearing embrace round my
waist; he then complimented me upon my love of literature, and said,
‘I love books as much as you do, and we may fairly hope to have a very
literary little family.’ Tho’ barely fifteen years old, the ridicule of
the man’s proceeding struck me so much that I could scarcely contain
my laughter, and my mother did for me that which my own timidity
prevented, for he immediately received his final _congé_. He used
to write verses upon me, and sent me a copy, with a dog, the turn of
which was that as I was afraid of thieves this cur would protect me
until I ‘a bolder guardian took,’ meaning his precious self.

[Sidenote: A FORMER SUITOR]

_22nd April, 1800._--Ld. Thurlow yesterday in the House of Lords,
with every expression of contempt, animadverting upon the folly of
the Bills now brought before Parliament, the one for protecting bull
baiting, the marriage of a divorced woman with the culprit, etc.,
addressed himself sarcastically to Lord Auckland, and said, ‘And pray,
my Lord, why do you not bring in a Bill against ingratitude,’ alluding
to Ld. A.’s desertion of Ld. North.[91] The reproof was coarse and
uncalled for. The Union was debated last night in both Houses. Mr.
Grey, in spite of secession, attended and made a very able speech.

The above story of Ld. Thurlow’s sarcasm is murdered. The sting lies in
the absurdity of attempting to correct moral vices by law, which makes
the sneer wittier.

Ly. Ann’s change from poverty and dependence to stately grandeur
reminds me of the pretty _Epître des Vous et des Tu_, in which
Voltaire sketches the delights of his youthful mistress, contrasted
with the dull pomp she was surrounded by after a splendid alliance:--

    Philis, qu’est devenu ce temps
    Où dans un fiacre promenée
    Sans laquais, sans ajustements,
    De tes grâces seules ornée, etc.

I invited Mr. Lattin to dine here to-day, and as an inducement
mentioned that it was to meet Dr. Parr. He wrote a gallant reply,
accompanied by the following verses, which he says are the first he
ever wrote in French:--

    L’Histoire nous apprend, que pour être écoutée
    La Sagesse eut recours
    Aux grâces, aux amours,
    Et même de la Fable, à la voix empruntée.
    Mais pour nous persuader, c’est la première fois
    Que la beauté s’adresse
    A la froide sagesse,
    Où Vénus de Minerve ait employé la voix.

_27th April._--On Wednesday, ye 23rd, Dr. Parr dined and slept
here. He was pleasant enough and not too full of grammatical niceties.
I overheard him and Knight condemn various corrupt pronunciations and
agree in saying, ‘You and I can never pass them: we can never call
Xenophon otherwise than Xeno_pho_.’

[Sidenote: THE CZAR PAUL]

The French army under Kléber, by a convention between it, Sir Sidney,
and the Turks, is to quit Egypt; the Turks are to furnish transports.
The Governt. here are incensed against Sir Sidney; they complain of
the terms, and wish the French had been necessitated to remain and
perish from the plague, etc.[92] The plausible objection is, that the
Austrians have just come to be dissatisfied at the augmentation of
17,000 efficient, hardy troops to their enemy just at the beginning
of the campaign. The magnanimous Emperor of all the Russias is in
a passion; he has written to our Court to insist upon the recall
of Sir C. Whitworth,[93] who has committed the unpardonable offence
of visiting Count Cobenzel, the Austrian Minister; and his Imperial
Majesty has besides withdrawn his Russians in our pay. The high pay may
however tempt him to relent.[94] About a month ago he sent to Mr. Pitt,
Ld. Grenville, and Mr. Huskisson, 3 crosses of the Order of Malta, of
which order he has constituted himself the head, altho’ one of the
fundamental rules requires that every knight should be a Catholic and a
bachelor. He is of the Greek Church, and husband to a prolific Empress.
The great source of his wrath is about the island of Malta, which he
wants to possess, and which we will not agree to his having.

Mr. Grey made his annual motion for reform last Friday.[95] He made it
so moderate by softening down the rough edges that Wilberforce and Dr.
Laurence voted with him. Sheridan, Sir F. Burdett, Jones,[96] etc.,
were deterred from attending, as he was what they called _too_
moderate. After the debate he came and supped, and slept here. He
lamented his own precipitation and bad judgment in urging the measure
of secession, and very distinctly declared that whatever blame might
attach to it, _he_ was responsible for, as it was pressed upon
Mr. Fox against his opinion and inclination. I conveyed to him very
cautiously, that his attendance, unless he had an explicit and a
sort of public declaration from Mr. Fox that he wished himself to be
considered as null, would not be looked upon as fair; he assured me
that Fox had oftentimes urged him to attend.[97] I implied that such an
assurance was of course all his _conscience_ could require, yet
that public opinion demanded more publicity to be given to the wish
of Mr. F. than the report of a private conversation; to which he said
he never could ask Mr. Fox to declare himself for ever withdrawn from
public affairs.

I dined on Saturday, 26th, at L. H. In the morning Ld. Wycombe called
upon me; we were standing in the porch just as Ld. Lansdown drove into
the iron gate, upon which this dutiful son flew off in a tangent, and
exhibited a _scene_ before my servants and his father’s.

The following verses are written by Lewis, a pretty address from
Friendship to Youth:--

    Turn, Wanderer, turn, and rest with me,
    Let not yon glittering fane allure you:
    My temple shall your shelter be,
    My sacred fire from cold secure you.

    Nor scorn it, though your dazzled sight
    No burst of lustrous flame surprises
    As with mild warmth and lambent light
    It gently from the altar rises.

    More vivid fires gild yonder shrine,
    More heat and radiance round them casting,
    But trust me, Youth, though bright they shine,
    Their rage is fierce, their power is blasting.

    Ah! pilgrim, shun the fatal blaze,
    Thy forward steps forbear to number;
    The blaze which on _my_ altar plays
    Gives genial warmth and gentle slumber.

    Here Reason as the priestess stands,
    Here Tranquil Pleasure often lingers;
    At Friendship’s fire then warm thy hands,
    At Love’s thou’lt surely burn thy fingers!
                                         ‘Friendship,’

[Sidenote: A PARODY]

I showed them to Tierney, who parodied them almost offhand as an
address from a Warming-Pan to Old Age:--

    Turn, dotard, turn, and rest with me,
    Let not yon glittering fane allure you:
    My presence shall your comfort be,
    My sacred fire from cold secure you.

    Nor scorn it, though your dazzled sight
    No burst of lustrous splendour meets,
    As with mild warmth each chilly night
    It gently glides between the sheets.

    More vivid fires gild yonder shrine,
    Their blaze, ’tis true, more fiercely rages,
    But, know, they give, unlike to mine,
    More smoke than heat at certain ages.

    Ah! shun then their delusive blaze,
    Thy forward steps forbear to number,
    The flame which on _my_ altar plays
    Gives genial warmth and gentle slumber.

    Turn, turn, from love and such repose,
    Nurse what of life within thee lingers,
    With me at least thou’lt warm thy toes,
    With Love thou’lt only burn thy fingers.
                                      ‘Warmingpan.’

_5th May._--Last week Ld. H. made a motion in the H. of Lords in favour
of the Catholics, to obtain what they call their emancipation.[98]
Lord Lansdown, like a sly old politician, was glad of an opportunity
of saying something on behalf of the Catholics, mingled with a praise
of the Union, so that should the Union fail, he may say, ‘I foresaw
that ye measure, without granting the Catholics their demands, would
prove a mischievous one’; and if it should succeed he may say, ‘I
supported Ministers on it.’ In his speech he made several heartfelt
compliments to Ld. H. He said that whenever he differed in opinion from
him he doubted the rectitude of his own judgment; for of his excellent
abilities, he added, the House were competent to judge, but of the
goodness of his heart those only who had the happiness of knowing him
in private could estimate the value. He went on in this strain for
near ten minutes. The whole debate was flat, none were in spirits; Ld.
H. was unwell, and more than usually chilled by the deadness of his
audience. Tierney declares that accustomed as he is to act singly in
the H. of Commons, yet he could not bear up in the H. of Lords; there
is a palsied indifference in the hearers that checks all spirit.

[Sidenote: LORD LANSDOWN]

It was essential to Ld. Lansdown to preserve the attachment of ----
during his Administration. But ---- confided to Ld. L. that his health
was injured by an irregularity of life. One should have thought from
the austerity of Ld. L.’s manners and private character that he was
a singular person to select for such a confidence, but so it was.
‘Indeed, I am not surprised, the calamitous state of the country,
the imbecility of Ministers, the augmentation of the debt, and the
increased influence of the Crown is such that I own to you very
frankly for dissipation I plunge myself into the lowest debauchery.’
He then, after this prelude, administered friendly relief. This is
very characteristic of him; the sort of jumble of ideas, and the
overstrained civility of adapting his own conduct to that of the person
he wishes to please, however repugnant it might be to him in reality.

‘Comment, mon ami,’ cried a wife to her drunken husband. ‘Vous vous
perdez, vous laissez toujours votre esprit au cabaret.’ ‘Ne craignez
rien, ma chère, j’irais la chercher dimanche.’

People are very much occupied with this Divorce Bill.[99] Ld. H. has
felt a shyness in attending the progress of it in the H. of Lords.
A Bishop, full of the subject, last week began talking to him; he
expressed his approbation of its becoming a criminal proceeding, and
added, ‘And do you not think, my Lord, that it would diminish the
frequency of the vice, if parties were condemned to imprisonment for
five years?’ Ld. H. was, of course, puzzled how to answer. The Bishop
was B. of Chichester.

_8th May._--D. of Bedford, who is just returned to town, dined
here; Ld. H. was detained at the H. of Lds. Fortunately I had Francis,
and the day went off pleasantly. We talked of Mr. Fox’s history, to
which he has written the introduction. It was lamented that instead
of taking the period of which he could say so much from personal
knowledge, he should go to one distant and well known. The Duke said
his reason was extreme indignation against Hume, whom he had been
reading last autumn; who very artfully pleads the cause of the House
of Stuart, and in a way to interest his reader about the private
virtues of Charles I., ‘Who, by-the-bye,’ added he, ‘is a most amiable
man when viewed in his domestic capacity.’ Upon this Francis, with
his usual impetuous vivacity, burst forth against him, denying him
every qualification that constitutes a gentleman or a man of feeling.
He quoted two stories out of Carte’s _Life of ye D. of Ormond_,
a writer who is allowed to have a strong bias to the Stuarts. One
was, that in the Palace at Whitehall there were etiquettes, ‘similar
to those established by that _fop Louis XIV._,’ about certain
apartments, which could only be entered by men of distinguished
quality. Hampden, by accident, and through ignorance of these courtly
rules, got into one. Suddenly a noise announced the entrance of the
King; to conceal himself he sculked behind a screen. His friends
with whom he was conversing were in a bustle; the King upon entering
perceived their disorder, and insisted upon knowing the cause. He
explored behind the screen, and upon finding Hampden, he shook his
cane over his head, and threatened to beat him and worse, if he ever
broke through bounds again. The other was, his receiving a petition
on horseback, which was presented to him by Sir T. Fairfax and a
deputation kneeling; he made his horse curvet, kicked the knight, and
endangered his life. Clarendon’s style, he said, was _grave and
slow_. He told Dr. Parr here at dinner the other day that Swift’s
style was _clear and shallow, perfectly pellucid_. The fact is he
admires no style but his own, and that is worthy of admiration, as it
is much the best now.

[Sidenote: NEW BILLS]

D. of B. means to go down about this new Divorce Bill; he is very
eager against it. He says it will reverse the present system, for if
a circumstance of the sort occurs to a husband who is high-spirited,
he generally fights the lover, whereas the lover will now threaten the
husband by saying, ‘If you make an _éclat_ and get me whipped at
the cart’s tail, by G----, I will kill you.’

A Bill is to be brought forward in the H. of Commons by Sir H. Mildmay
to check the increase of Catholicism, by preventing the nuns at
Winchester from giving the veil. An attempt to make a proselyte will
become penal. Mr. Fox, when he heard of these Bills, the one against
celibacy and the other, said, ‘Aye, the poor women, they will not let
them do one thing or the other.’

_11th May._--Parr entertained us uncommonly; he was in full
force. We gratified him highly by going into the room into which he
retreated to smoke. His vanity is such that the slightest attention
elates him, and more particularly, when it comes from a person whom
he would denominate a woman of quality. Mr. Knight’s love of pedantry
got him too frequently upon verbal criticism, and when they did fall
upon a doubtful Greek word, they pulled at it like hungry curs. When
they returned to the library he talked upon literature. His praise
of Middleton’s style was that a man of strong feelings and vigorous
conceptions ought to study it to abate the ardour and rigidity of
style, and he recommended it to Bobus. He asserted that Middleton was
an unbeliever in Christianity, and read several passages, which put
it out of all doubt, from his _Defence of the Free Enquiry_. Of
Warburton he expressed the utmost admiration; his opponents, he said,
who had attacked him, were snarling hounds; ‘mine was the froth of a
mastiff.’ He said of Burke’s first book upon the French Revolution that
it was ‘the effervescence of rage’; the second was ‘the bitter sediment
of malignity.’

On Tuesday I went to Money Hill; Miss Fox, Drew, and Charles went with
us. I returned on Friday. The two mornings I passed there we drove
about in the sociable to see the country.

We drove through Cassiobury, Lord Essex’s; to The Grove, Ld.
Clarendon’s, and so on to Russell Farm, the Ladies’ Capel. Pretty
ground and fertile country. Ld. H. fished, and caught a few trout.
Beauclerk did not articulate ten words; he seems happy, but it is the
bliss of torpor. She resides reluctantly in the dignified solitude of
a _guinguette_ in the skirts of a petty town. From Beauclerk’s
practice one should think his precept was that conversation spoilt
society; he rarely incurs that _risque_. It is to be regretted,
as he has a most acute perception, and an uncommon degree of subtilty
in his argument. No person is clearer on the _obscure_ subject
of abstract metaphysics; his definitions are ingenious and brilliant.
Finance is also a branch of political economy he is profound in, and
had he entered Parliament he would have distinguished himself. At
present he is lost; shyness, indolence, and a sort of content deprive
society of his exertions and his friends of his company.

[Sidenote: THE KING SHOT AT]

The papers on Friday announced a singular accident which happened to
the King at the Review on Thursday in Hyde Park; a musket ball wounded
a Mr. Ongley standing near him. The question was whether it was from
design or chance--the chance of an unloaded musket. When I came home,
the first question I asked the porter in getting out of my carriage
was whether there was anything new; he replied with eager alarm that
the King had been shot at from a pistol at the play. I thought this
story an exaggeration of the former one, but to my surprise found
that the evening of the day on which he had escaped the bullet, he
was deliberately aimed at from the pit. The ball lodged in the upper
boxes, and the King escaped unhurt. His behaviour was like that of a
hero of antiquity; he was in full possession of all his faculties,
and was cool enough to tell the Queen, who was not in the box when
the pistol was fired, that the report was from a squib. He remained
on during the play with the utmost sang-froid. He told a person that
he observed the fiddlers expected another shot as they covered their
heads with their cremonas. The enthusiasm was boundless; additional
verses were added by Sheridan to _God Save the King_.[100] The
King was so delighted with Sheridan’s behaviour to the Princesses, for
he prevented them going into their box by saying that a pickpocket
was taken in the pit which made a riot and his presence was required,
and begged their R.H. to wait in the room. He shall feel gratitude to
the latest hour of his life, he says, to him for this sensibility.
Sheridan, Mrs. S., and Tom are all to go to Court, both to-morrow and
Thursday. Mr. Fawkener[101] dined with us on Friday; he had attended
the examination of the man at the Privy Council, and he said he was
certainly mad. He was dismissed the army for insanity a few months ago,
and he has since worked as a silver-smith; his name is Hadfield. I was
vexed at not being present. I never much liked Money Hill, but this has
disgusted me, for had I been at home I should have gone in my own box,
from where I should have seen the whole _representation_, and with
safety.

Ld. Morpeth was to have come to Money Hill on Wednesday; he came to
tell me on Saturday that his carriage was at the door at one o’clock
to convey him thither, but that he was at White’s, not returned from
_Tuesday evening’s_ occupation; he owned to losing two thousand
pounds. He will grow a decided gambler.

My old friend and admirer, Ld. Berkeley, gave Lord Chesterfield a
reproving repartee. Ld. B. has killed two or three highwaymen, and
it is known that he is distressed when the occurrence is alluded to.
Ld. C., meaning to annoy him, asked him ‘When he had last killed a
highwayman?’ ‘It was, my Lord, as well as I can recollect, just at the
time when you hung your tutor,’ alluding to the unfeeling and wicked
transaction about Dr. Dodd, who, though deserving of punishment, should
not have met with it from his pupil, who from youth and gratitude ought
to have felt more indulgence for the errors of Dodd.[102]

The Prince of Wales has notified his Royal pleasure of dining here. He
grew quite angry at not being invited; he even spoke to my mother about
it. He comes on Saturday, and Prince Augustus.[103] The latter came
home to England without the knowledge and against the consent of their
Majesties. He arrived at the house of Lady Augusta.

[Sidenote: MRS. FITZHERBERT]

I went last night to the Opera. The Princess of Wales glanced many an
inquiring look towards Mrs. Fitzherbert’s box, in which the Prince was
as usual. This old amour is revived. The opinion of the world is so
whimsical. Every prude, dowager, and maiden visited Mrs. F. before, and
the decline of her favour scarcely reduced her visitors; but now they
all cry out shame for doing that which she did notoriously five years
ago. There is a sort of morality I can never comprehend.

Ld. H. took a fancy for about a week to write me some verses every
night after he went to undress; I complained of his keeping me up late,
he wrote immediately:--

    That his labours have set you asleep, is allowed
    The severest reproach to a bard you can make.
    Have not I then great cause to be proud--
    Your objection to mine is they keep you awake.

Ld. H. went to the Levée on Wednesday with Ld. Ossory to congratulate
the King upon his escape; he went also on Thursday to the Drawing Room,
and on Friday he went in a cap and gown with the Oxford Address. Mr.
Marsh came to town as a delegate; he arrived on Thursday and stayed
till this morning.

The Ministers have not attempted to convert this mad freak of
Hadfield’s into a Jacobinical plot; they let the affair stand plainly
as it is. When Erskine heard of the shot from a man in the pit, he
said, ‘I thought the _Pitt-ites_ would do the King mischief at
last.’ Should the poor lunatic be condemned, I think the King will feel
a qualm at signing the warrant, as it is proved that the man was only
insane in consequence of a severe wound in his head received while
fighting in the King’s cause.[104] As a confirmation of the opinion of
the man’s acting without any concert with other people, what happened
to Mr. Tierney will acquit the soldier who fired in the Park. On
Thursday, riding from hence through the Park, he went by some soldiers
who were reviewing, and a musket ball whizzed close by his ear. He told
the story to Ford, the justice, and it is clear that the cartridges
have been made improperly, that those which used to be for exercising
with powder only, and in a particular coloured paper, are now loaded
with ball.

The Prince of Wales, Prince Augustus, and a very numerous party dined
here on Saturday; it went off very pleasantly. Prince Augustus is much
altered from what he was at Rome; his mind and body are thickened.

The Divorce Bill, with the abominable clause, has passed the H. of
Lords, the purport of which is to prevent the woman marrying the
man on whose account the divorce takes place, and in addition to
pecuniary damages to the husband, the offence is to be treated as a
_misdemeanour_, and the punishment of fine and imprisonment rests
_solely_ with the judge.

Some persons were boasting before Mr. Fox of the excellence of the
English laws, which he said certainly were excellent, but that there
were objections at present. ‘How?’ replied the other person. ‘The law
is equally open to the peasant and the peer.’ ‘Yes,’ said Fox, ‘so is
the London tavern,’ meaning that to benefit by them one must pay dearly.

[Sidenote: MR. FOX]

The following quotation from Carlyle’s[105] translation of Arabic
poetry has been very happily applied by General Fitzpatrick to Mr.
Fox, who is the life and soul of the Whig party, both from the opinion
entertained by them of his ability, and the esteem and friendship they
bear to his person:--

    With conscious pride I view the band
    Of faithful friends that round me stand,
    With pride exult that I alone
    Can join these scattered gems in one;
    For they’re a wreath of pearls, and I
    The silken cord on which they lie.

    ’Tis mine their inmost souls to see,
    Unlocked is every heart to me,
    To me they cling, on me they rest,
    And I’ve a place in every breast;
    For they’re a wreath of pearls, and I
    The silken cord on which they lie.

Lord Wycombe has never passed the threshold of our doors since the day
he saw his father drive into the gates, whilst he was in the porch.
Whether he imagined the _rencontre_ was the effect of design or
that he chooses to have the air of appearing to think so, I cannot
guess; but the effect, from some cause or other, has been his absence.

The campaign does not advance as swimmingly as was expected by the
allies. Melas, when he took the Bocchetta, expected Genoa could not
hold out long after the loss of that important pass, but Masséna is
determined to maintain himself till the last gasp, and now he is
certain of being relieved, as Bonaparte has taken the command in person
of the army of Italy.[106]

_30th May._--The last date of his dispatch was ye 18th of May
at Martigny, but Berthier with the advanced division has crossed
the Mt. of St. Bernard, and has reached Aost. The French have a
_pied-à-terre_ only at Genoa and Savona; Mantua, Milan, etc., are
at present in the possession of the Austrians. Melas has taken Nice,
but must quit it immediately to meet Bonaparte in Piedmont. Moreau
has advanced to within a short distance of Ulm. Knay, the Austrian
commander, is very obstinate, and strongly addicted to the old system
of carrying on war by _posts_.

The Emperor Paul is grown quite mad. The French have made a caricature
of him with _order_ in one hand, _counter-order_ in the other, and on
his head _dis_order. Sir Charles Whitworth will feel happy when fairly
off his territory, as he is capable of proceeding to personal violence
against those with whom he is incensed. The English who inhabit
Petersburg are detained as hostages for his 15,000 men in Jersey
and Guernsey. Woronzow,[107] the Russian Minister, who has resided
in this country many years, is suddenly recalled, as his dispatches
have not been sufficiently abusive of this Government to please the
Imperial taste; he is quite wretched, for besides breaking up all his
old habits, he is not without apprehension of some punishment being
inflicted upon him when he returns.

Parr says of the Bishop of Rochester’s sermon, which was quoted so
ludicrously and well by the Duke of Clarence, that it contains ‘the
precepts of the Koran, conveyed in the language of the Stews.’[108] The
sermon was preached at the Magdalen, and Mr. Grey assured me without
any joke that the doctrine and the language are both so extraordinary
that no modest woman would read it, or own to having done so.

[Sidenote: LADY GEORGINA CAVENDISH]

The D. of Bedford has been living here a great deal; he likes Ld. H.
very much, and has grown to vanquish his prejudice against me, enough
almost to like me. He would be ungrateful if he did not in some degree,
as he is one of the very few persons of whom I think thoroughly well:
he is honourable, just, and true. Lady John Russell[109] has been here
several times, and is remarkably gracious. This I owe to the Duke’s
frequent visits, as she is curious to ascertain what object attracts
him here, and politic enough to adapt her taste to his. The probability
is that, without her caution even, he will not marry, unless indeed he
should fix upon Ly. Georgiana Cavendish,[110] an alliance long arranged
for him by the world. Ly. G. is a most charming girl--sensible,
pleasing, full of information and totally without a particle of
affectation, and if she bestows herself upon a man equal to her in
situation, I have no doubt she will make a most delightful wife. Little
Lewis is upon the eve of making himself a great fool about her, and,
as he is not _séduisant_ in person or manner, will not gain her
heart, and a bundle of sonnets in lieu of title deeds will not operate
in his favour with the elders of ye family.

Ld. H. brought Sheridan and Ld. John Russell home from the H. of
Commons to a late dinner here at 8. By some accident Sheridan happened
to be out of the House just at the moment when a division might have
been made with advantage, as Sir Wm. Scott’s[111] speech made so much
impression _against_ the Bill. Sr. Wm. denied the fact asserted in
the preamble to the Bill, as to ye increased frequency of divorces. He,
who is the head of the Ecclesiastical Court, spoke with weight when he
declared that the _crime_ was diminishing, as there had been fewer
suits from ’90 to 1800 than from ’80 to ’90, or from 1770 to 1780. The
whole tenor of his speech was full of tenderness and right feeling
towards women.

I went on Monday evening to Mrs. Walker’s masquerade. I chatted
pleasantly enough with some of my old acquaintances. Mr. Grey
introduced Mrs. Grey to me,[112] as did Mr. Whitbread his wife, Grey’s
sister. Mrs. Grey is pretty and gentle, without looking so; she is
handsome Ponsonby’s sister. Mrs. W. has something pleasing in her
appearance, but ill-health and the hereditary irritability of the Grey
temper gives a certain fractious expression to her countenance: _au
reste_, she is a very worthy, excellent woman.

[Sidenote: THE KING SHOT AT]

Sheridan entertained us with a circumstantial account of the whole
affair at the theatre on the night of the assassination. He was in
the Royal box when the pistol was fired, and saw most plainly the man
take aim. Ld. Chesterfield advised His Majesty to retire to the back
of the box, but the King said, ‘Not an inch, not an inch,’ and upon
the Queen’s entrance he waved his hand to make her keep behind, upon
the pretext of her fear of squibs. S., as soon as the poor wretch was
dragged out of the orchestra, examined him. He declares his answers
were collected and distinct, until Sr. Wm. Addington[113] questioned
him, who was extremely drunk, and suggested to the man ye plea of
insanity by his mode of examining--a plea the man craftily availed
himself of.

When Sheridan went to Court, the King spoke to him upon indifferent
subjects and seemed undecided whether or not he should notice the
occurrence. At length he said how much he was struck with the behaviour
of the audience, which gave S. an opportunity of saying they only
followed His Majesty’s example. After a few such flourishes the King
ended by saying he should despise himself if he had acted otherwise,
for every man ought to feel his duty, and his was to stay quiet and not
add to the alarm.

Mr. Abbot[114] has brought forward a Bill respecting Public Debtors,
which alarmed us until it was explained, but it seems fair in
principle, tho’ ultimately we may be affected to a degree. All who have
balances in hand will hereafter pay interest upon such sums. The debt
from this family now due to Government is 53,000_l._; the assets
are near 46, the odd thousands Ld. H. must supply. The difference of
the Bill taking effect will be that the interest must go to Governt.,
instead of making an accumulating fund, which in a few years would pay
off the whole. Mr. Moore is afraid from rumour that a clause is to be
moved by Mr. Baker to make the operation of the Bill retrospective. In
that case, to the last shilling of Ld. H.’s property must go, as the
amount would be enormous, but it seems so unjust that the alarm is, I
trust, groundless.

[Sidenote: SIR G. WEBSTER’S DEATH]

Early on Wednesday morning last, ye 4th of June, we were roused by a
loud rapping at the bedroom door opening into the drawing-room. My
mother cried out that she had brought great news, that Sir Godfrey
Webster was dead; that he expired the evening before in a fit. He had
been indisposed for some days, which made the event more natural. I
could not hear of his death without emotion, and was for some time
considerably agitated. But, my God! how was I overcome when Drew showed
me a hasty note written to him by Hodges to apprise me of the manner of
his death. He shot himself, he added, in consequence of heavy losses
at play. With him dies all resentment, and, great as my injuries have
been, willingly would I renounce all that may accrue to me from this
dreadful event to restore him again to existence, with the certainty of
his paying the _natural_ debt of nature. Unhappy man! What must
have been the agony of his mind, to rouse him to commit a deed of such
horror. Peace to his soul, and may he find that mercy I would bestow.

His confidential servant gave the following details: that he had
appeared frequently disordered in his mind in the course of the winter,
and that latterly his spirits were gone, and a physician attended him
for a slow fever. But the malady was deeper; it was on his mind. Twice
within the last weeks he had attempted to destroy himself by laudanum,
but each time his man interposed, once by wrenching the phial out of
his hand, and the other by compelling him to swallow an emetic. On
Saturday he despatched his relation, a Mr. Whistler, to fetch from
Sussex titledeeds of some estates, merely a device to get him out of
the way. On Tuesday he went out at nine o’clock, and purchased at Egg’s
a brace of pistols, and after various devices and stratagems to get his
servants out of the way, he but too fatally succeeded, and at half past
four shot himself in his front drawing-room in Tenterden Street. Have
mercy on him, Oh heaven!

Business compelled me to go to town, and my coachman drove me to the
square; the shock of being almost within sight of those mangled remains
was too much, of him, unhappy man, who now lies a melancholy proof of
feelings too acute for existence. I would not have the self-reproach of
having added one particle to the agony he endured, and am thankful that
this sad catastrophe did not arise two years ago, altho’ I should have
been as guiltless a cause as now; but the world and my own readiness
to upbraid myself would have assigned my quitting him as the cause.
Ld. Egremont,[115] with whom he had lately lived in habits of social
intercourse, called at his door just after the perpetration of this
dreadful act; he was excessively shocked, and went three times that
night in great agitation to Ld. Ossory’s. He declared his intention
of sending for the boys from school, and is now gone to Petworth with
Webby. Henry is with my mother. The dear girl remains at school.
Hitherto no will subsequent to that of ’86 has been found; perhaps
upon a strict examination one may be discovered. The funeral went down
this morning to Battle, very privately attended. Mr. Plummer was with
me, and told me he was a creditor to the amount of seventeen thousand
pounds.

_8th June, 1800._--The average produced by my estates is estimated
at seven thousand pr. anm. We shall not touch a stiver for these 18
months, and only till then incur trouble and expense. To recover the
money to fulfil the complement dictated by my grandfather’s will, I
must go to the seizure of his personal property. The sound is at first
repugnant, seize the property to which my son is heir, but, in fact, it
is only ascertaining my right, by which I shall prevent his coming upon
the Holland estates after my death.[116]

I have abstained from seeing company since this horrid business,
chiefly from feeling unfit for society; and, besides that, I would
not that any person should say that I exulted in an acquisition so
obtained, and I think, if I did not feel strongly myself, it would
be judicious to do nothing that might be reported to my children as
offensive. The anxiety about their guardianship is great; it does not
yet appear to whom the charge devolves. I wait quietly till the will
is found, or the one of ’86 acted upon. If none is found, the verbal
injunctions laid upon his family to exclude me from the happiness of
seeing my children will operate but slightly. I shall openly seize
every occasion of making them know how near an object it is to my
heart to be loved by them, and opinion will side with me, however the
Chaplins may act to annoy me. If the will of ’86 is to be in force,
then nothing will be done but by the advice of the executors.

[Sidenote: ‘LEGAL RECLUSES’]

There is a curious but violent quarrel carried on between Lord Carlisle
and Lord Kenyon; they abuse each other bitterly in their different
_courts_, publicly and separately. On the night of the debate upon
the Divorce Bill, in favour of which the lawyers are very eager, Lord
Carlisle, in adverting to the various arguments, said that lawyers
were from their sedentary occupations and retired habits incapable
of judging the offences and punishments of the upper classes, and he
applied to the corps of lawyers the term of ‘legal recluses.’ Ld.
Eldon, who officiated for the Chancellor, took up the expression and
was indignant at its being applied to the enlightened body who from
their employment in human affairs were generally supposed to understand
mankind. The Bishop of Rochester was furious, and said many cutting
things to Ld. Carlisle, such as, he supposed that he would have the
offence decided upon by those only who had committed, and in a marked
manner showed he thought Ld. C. in that case entitled to judge.
The next day, Ld. Kenyon, in the Court of King’s Bench, in summing
up a charge to the jury, contrived to introduce the expression of
‘cloistered recluses’ as having been used in the H. of Lds., and again
declared his knowledge of human life to be equal to his wishes, and
thanked his God he had not the knowledge of it which was acquired by
‘titled adulterers at Newmarket, in Bond Street, and in the Stews.’ Ld.
C. has taken notice of this reference to his speech in Parliament as
unparliamentary, and means to move some resolution against the printer.
He has been with Ld. Holland this morning, who has advised him to adopt
another mode, and furnished him with the words; accordingly he will
follow his advice.

_9th June._--Erskine came unexpectedly to dinner yesterday. He is,
as I could not help telling him, by far the most extraordinary man I
ever met with. An incomprehensible compound of wit, ability, absurdity,
folly, vanity, and sagacity. He repeated to me some lines he had
written in court upon Serjeant Lens,[117] who was examining a witness
with some pertinacity:--

    The Lenses that common opticians have
    Are plano convex, or plano concave;
    But the Lens of the law being formed to perplex,
    At no time is plain, but concave and convex;
    Convex his own case to enlarge and expound,
    Concave his opponents t’obscure and confound.

He can pun in rhyme, but to harmony of verse he has no pretence. He
wrote the following epigram upon a very parsimonious lady, a Mrs.
Wharton, when at Tunbridge:--

    Oft has my soul, puft up with pride,
    The truth of sacred writ denied,
    And to myself I still have said,
    ‘Sure mankind ne’er of dust was made;’
    Till thou, dear Peg, revers’d my creed
    And showed me we were dust indeed.

[Sidenote: BILL AGAINST PUBLIC DEBTORS]

The clause in Abbot’s Bill was not designed by him to have a
retrospective operation upon those who have balances in bond due to
Governt., but it was worded with such ambiguity that it threw persons
so circumstanced into the power of the Auditors of the Exchequer. Ld.
H. begged some confidential friends to attend to get it otherwise
worded, and employed Adam as counsel to get Abbot and Baker to alter
it. Tierney promised zeal and attention; Sheridan undertook it warmly.
When the day came I grew afraid of Tierney’s candour, and thought he
might yield to Abbot’s assurance of the harmlessness of the words;
for Tierney would sacrifice the interests of anybody to obtain the
occasional popularity of conciliating an opponent. I therefore enjoined
Mr. Moore to rely _solely_ upon Sheridan, who tho’ _never_ punctual and
not famously steady, yet would, I was persuaded, exert himself where he
thought his services material. I was right. Tierney acquiesced in all
Abbot alleged in behalf of the clause, and it was just going to pass
into the Bill, when Sheridan arrived breathless from haste, examined
the words, declared the sentence neither grammar, logic, or sense, and
employed near two hours to convince the Committee that the ambiguous
words should be expunged. They were so. The difference lay between
‘_shall have been declared_,’ and ‘_shall be_.’ I provoked Tierney
by telling him before Whitbread, that my instructions to Moore were
to shun the honest, candid man, as he would never help a friend at a
pinch, too timid to essentially serve, too timid to commit himself by
an opinion against any man, were the grounds not public and popular.

Interest commences from the enacting of this Bill, thus the interest
cannot be reserved as usual to make a fund, and thus pay off the whole
of the debt in a few years without touching us. But the principle is
just, and nothing can be said against it with any decorum: and as
it now stands it is certainly an expense, yet compared to what it
_might_ have been I am satisfied.

_11th June._--D. of Bedford dined with us, and gave an account of the
debate last night. Ld. Carlisle was to have made his motion against
Kenyon, but a shuffling sort of compromise made it go off tamely;
he agreed to withdraw it if Grenville desired it. A languid, half
shabby business. The Duke spoke. It is comical how eagerly these
seceding gentlemen embrace every opportunity of speaking; on the most
unimportant subjects unconnected with politics they attend, and say
their say. Last night the Divorce Bill was thrown out in the Commons:
not even admitted into a Committee. The mortification of its rejection
_thus_ will be double to Ld. Auckland; such marked contempt. Sheridan
made an admirable speech, and did not mar the effect of it by too much
wit; his matter was excellent. Ld. H. supplied him. At his request he
wrote a little treatise which is full of sound reason and practical
good sense. I have a copy of it.

Ld. H.’s epigrams on Horsley[118] were lying upon my table; Ld. G.
Leveson, in rummaging over the papers upon it, found them and took
them. Ld. H. being jokingly angry, wrote this:--

    Though in private my Muse in a profligate humour
    Her nakedness never withheld from your view,
    Yet she liked not that all who at tea in the room are
    Should have the same privilege too, and would you?

The following he said would suit ----, an impotent husband, to his
wife:--

    As women wish to be who love their lords
    You wish to be, and ask why it delayed is.
    Because I’m not (what need of many words),
    As husbands ought to be that love their ladies!

  [Illustration:

    _Louis Gauffier, pinx._       _Emery Walker Ph.sc._

  _Henrietta, third Countess of Bessborough_]

[Sidenote: CHIRAC]

Dumont mentioned a curious anecdote of Chirac, the celebrated physician
of Louis XIV.,[119] told to him by Condorcet. At 84 years old he
fell into a violent illness, which was his last. He lay for two days in
a state of insensibility; he suddenly jumped up and sat upright in his
bed, felt the pulse of his left hand with his right, shook his head,
and in a loud voice cried, ‘On m’a appelé trop tard, le malade est
mourant,’ He immediately fell back, verified his own prediction, and
expired. He was the man roused in the night to attend a dying Cardinal,
a person of very profligate life and infamous character. To hasten the
physician, the messenger said, ‘Venez donc, il souffre comme un damné.’
‘Comment déjà?’--a bitter sarcasm in one word. He was present at a
dispute upon the Resurrection of Christ; some thought it was impossible
that he should have arisen after death. Chirac only said, ‘Si il était
mort de ma façon,’ implying without levity, his own incredulity.

We have had a consultation with three lawyers, Piggott, Erskine, and
Richards, upon the propriety of taking out a licence, or getting an
Act of Parliament for my name, as it is particularly enjoined by my
grandfather’s will that the person to whom the estate goes by descent
should bear his name. There is some nicety in ye question, because,
tho’ I am only just come into the profits of it, yet I was virtually
possessed of it when that unhappy man compelled me to renounce it to
him, and it may lead to an examination as to our signatures. This would
be troublesome, as out of accommodation to him I signed two bonds
without the name of Vassall. Ld. H. has only a marital dominion over
it, and cannot be subject to forfeiture. Richards and Erskine think
the title of honour supersedes all, and that no mischief has been yet
incurred. It is not yet decided. Ld. H. went yesterday to Plummer’s.
I wrote to Ld. Ossory, and begged him to accompany him--a proposal
certain of pleasing, not only as it showed confidence and attention,
but that it gratified his curiosity.

It appears that the average of the net produce, deducting outfit,
annuities, mortgage, jointure, insurance, and, in short, every
expenditure, is within a hundred or two of six thousand pr. anm., an
ample acquisition, but as yet must not be anticipated or enjoyed. Sir
G. W. has left property, however, to answer all debts. Webby must have
1000_l._ pr. ann. certain; that accumulating for ten years and
half will be something. Henry and Harriet five thousand each.

Canning is immediately to be married to Miss Scott;[120] she has an
immense fortune. He has just been made a Privy Councillor and Joint
Paymaster; if ever a man was born with a silver spoon in his mouth,
surely it was him.

Ld. H. was telling us to-day of the whimsical effect produced by a
droll manner of compressing the substance of a man’s speech. A Mr.
Robson, who is neither witty nor clever by-the-way, gave his whole
attention to one of Windham’s speeches; he did not listen to the
other debating, and when it came to voting he rose and said that ‘The
Honourable Gentleman had declared that we were not fighting _for_
the Restoration of the Bourbons, but that we _should_ fight till
they were restored, therefore he should give his vote against him.’
This done with gravity would get the laugh on his side, and provokingly
perplex his adversary.

[Sidenote: AN UNJUST WILL]

Erskine told us a singular cause that he was called to at Uxbridge.
It was to decide upon a will supposed to have been made whilst the
testator was under the influence of some morbid, mad affection of the
mind. He was the elder brother of a man with whom he had lived in the
closest habits of friendship, and to whom he was sincerely attached.
One day he came home heated and fatigued, complained of the colic, and
was advised by his brother to go to bed and drink warm rum and water.
He followed his advice, but whether the disease was naturally fever,
or that the rum created it, is not known; but the effect was raging
madness, during which he furiously inveighed against his brother for
having poisoned him in the drink. The frenzy continued, and he was
put under a mad doctor. In a few months he recovered his reason to
all intents and purposes, acted as a magistrate, fulfilled all the
functions of his station, gave law opinions, and betrayed no tokens of
insanity. But some years after when he died, it was found by the will
that he had excluded his brother, upon the old accusation of his having
administered poison to him. It came out that the man, in favour of whom
the younger brother had been disinherited, used to listen and rather
encourage his rhapsodies. Erskine substantiated the will, but made the
heir by will share alike with the lawful heir.

This story of rational madness reminded Ld. H. of one which Fontana
was fond of telling, because it squares with the common definition
of madness, and proves that a man may reason logically upon false
premises. A very intelligent Jesuit went mad, and his predominating
madness was that he believed himself to be a Cardinal. He was a loss
to their community, and being a very subtle logician two or three of
the cleverest of the Order undertook to argue with him, and convince by
reason that he laboured under an illusion, which he might dissipate by
force of mind. They asked him several questions as to the ceremonies
necessary to be undergone previous to the instalment of a man in the
College of Cardinals, to all of which he pleaded ignorance. ‘Why
then,’ said one, ‘how can you imagine yourself to be a Cardinal?’ He
replied, ‘I tell you that I am a Cardinal, and if you do not believe me
such when I assure so, you must suppose me to be mad, and if I am mad,
how can you be so mad as to try to convince by reason one who in that
case must be labouring under an alienation of it?’ This syllogism posed
the Reverend Brothers.

Wm. Lamb is returned from Glasgow quite bitten with a Scotch mania.
He thinks the Scotch have outdone in moral philosophy and ethics all
who have gone before them. To use his own expression, ‘They have gone
far beyond Locke and Paley,’ ‘Yes,’ replied Ld. H., ‘so far, that they
are unintelligible,’ He was under Professor Millar,[121] a friend of
Ld. Lauderdale’s, a man who has written upon Governt., and who is the
greatest enemy of all _belles lettres_ and poetry; the latter he
calls a mere jingle which proves no facts. Lamb is very clever and
pleasing, and will improve when he gets out of his love for singularity.

[Sidenote: LORD HENRY PETTY]

Ld. Henry Petty unites to a sound, strong understanding a pleasant
vein of cheerful humour, with talents and advantages far beyond his
years. His simplicity and unassuming manner is the most winning of his
qualifications. His character is very like Ld. H.’s, only he has less
playfulness of imagination, and less vivacity; his turn of mind is
rather serious, but in temper, artlessness, and integrity they are more
nearly allied even than by blood. Ld. Lansdown idolises him, and with
pleasure I perceive that his tenderness is bestowed upon an object
that will reward him with interest; poor old man, he wants filial
comfort.[122]

Bonaparte in his passage through Switzerland went to Coppet to see
Necker; some imagine that he proposed to him to accept the post of
Minister of Finance. Madame de Staël greeted the hero, and made a
political tirade for full twenty minutes; when she ceased she expected
a complimentary eulogism, all he said was, ‘Madame, a-t-elle nourri ses
enfants?’ A cutting rebuke.[123]

Dumont one evening read to us Rousseau’s description, in his
_Promenades solitaires_, of the Isle de St. Pierre, in which he
describes the felicity he enjoyed and his regrets at having quitted his
delicious retirement. Ld. H., who is no admirer of Rousseau in any way,
grew tired, and wrote this:--

    Rousseau was so charmed in his island St. Pierre
    With walking and rowing about;
    I agree with him heartily when he was there
    ’Twas a pity he ever came out.

Ld. H. told me this morning a piece of slyness of the Jacobinical
party towards him. About two years ago a man of the name of Gurney, a
solicitor, on behalf of the manufacturers entreated Ld. H. to speak
against a Bill, which involved their interests, then brought before
Parliament. It was entitled, a Bill to prevent unlawful combination
among the workmen. He spoke, and distinguished himself; his speech
was printed at Manchester and Liverpool, and distributed among the
manufacturers. It seems Burdett and Ld. Stanhope[124] grew jealous of
his popularity among _their_ friends, and have now contrived to
get the petitions given to them, and have, now that resistance to it
is become a little popular, espoused the cause. Ld. Stanhope told Ld.
H. that he had made himself ‘many friends among the most valuable part
of the community.’ Ld. H. of course does not care a straw upon the
occasion one way or the other; it only makes him laugh.

Ld. Thanet quitted his captivity on Monday last; he is delighted at
regaining his freedom, but a little annoyed at walking the streets
where he is shown as a sight, ‘There he goes: aye, that is him.’ He
says all rooms appear immense, his eye having been so long accustomed
to the straitened little apartment he occupied. Madame Bonawitz
latterly shared his confinement: she is reckoned clever, she writes
_English_ verses.

Our planet must have got out of its orbit and flown off further from
the sun, as the cold is very remarkable. Fires are indispensable, and
I, who have within these four years said the only place where a fire
was useful was the kitchen, am perishing. This is the 11th June, and
the servants continue fires, which is the more singular, as they in
general lay more stress upon the calendar than upon their feelings.
Bread is 17½_d._ the quartern loaf, butcher’s meat from one
shilling to 14_d._ pr. lb.; poultry, enormously dear; and every
other article of consumption in proportion. How the labouring poor
subsist and suffer their hardships patiently, are both problems.

[Sidenote: 1800 LORD ELLENBOROUGH]

Burke observed upon Mrs. Hastings’s[125] reception at Court, that the
Queen had but one vice, avarice, and but one virtue, decorum; but when
accident had brought them to contend, the vice had proved the stronger.

I dined with the Smiths on Saturday, where I met Serjeant Law,[126]
a man whose abilities are rated high in his profession, but who by a
singular piece of misfortune, has never yet had a fair opportunity
of distinguishing himself. He has a brief, clear way of expressing
himself, with a portion of causticity: he puts me in mind of Mr. Wm.
Fawkener. He dined here the next day. Our party consisted of almost all
the rising talents at the Bar, Bobus Smith, Mackintosh, Mr. Scarlett,
Sturges, Mr. Brand who, tho’ only an amateur, yet studies the law.
Fergusson, who is just liberated from the captivity of a year, called
so near the moment of dinner that it was impossible, with the most
adverse dispositions towards him, not to invite him. He accordingly
accepted the proposal. His beauty is much praised, I did not admire
him; about his mouth he has a mean expression. My _accueil_ was
not flattering or warm; as a guest he had my civility, otherwise a
particle of notice would not have been bestowed. I neither like the
man nor his cause. On Sunday the Beauclerks came to stay a day or two
_only_.

I made, through my mother, to Mr. Frogatt a proposal to be laid before
the guardians who may be appointed for my children by Chancery, the
substance of which is an offer to take upon myself the whole expense
of the maintenance and education of Harriet, that her fortune, which
is but five thousand pounds, may be allowed to accumulate until she
marries or is of age. I also wrote to him myself, adding that what I
asked was solely for the girl’s benefit, and that she would be equally
under the superintendence and control of her guardians. To this offer
I this day received an answer, merely to signify to me, that Mr.
Chaplin, in pursuance of the _earnest_ desire of ye late Sir G.
Webster, had applied to Chancery for the guardianship of the children:
a very improbable story, because if Sir G. Webster had recommended
his children to Chaplin, there would have existed a suspicion of his
intention of destroying himself; and, on the other hand, if it had been
his steady wish, he would at least have made a will in case of a death
as sudden and more unexpected. Sir Gilbert Affleck called upon Chaplin
yesterday, to propose to join in the application for the guardianship,
but Chaplin rejected the offer in a manner that Sir Gilbert told me it
was a force upon his feelings not to resent as it merited.

[Sidenote: GUARDIANSHIP OF THE CHILDREN]

Whilst Webby was at Petworth with Ld. Egremont, I wrote him a letter
under cover to Ld. E., in which, after inquiring how he was, I
conveyed my sense of Ld. E.’s kindness, adding that it was such that
it claimed the gratitude of all his family. Before this letter reached
Petworth Ld. E. had brought him to town to his grandmother’s and the
Chaplins, and I have not received a word of acknowledgment, which
seems unnecessarily harsh. This behaviour in Chaplin is the more
remarkable, as _he_ has uniformly assured me that he would use
his utmost endeavours to persuade Sir G. to let me see the children.
This assurance I have under his hand and signature. Besides, he was
quite cordial when I married Ld. H., wished me joy, and wound up his
congratulatory sentence with a sort of prophecy that I should be happy,
as my disposition was of a domestic turn, and that I had never hitherto
had a fair opportunity of showing the real goodness of my heart. He
visited Ld. H. and me, the year after, when he came to town, and, in
short, rather affected a sort of intimacy of intercourse. I shall set
every engine to work to counteract these unjust projects.

A few days ago I asked Ld. Stair[127] just to mention, the first
occasion he could find naturally, to Ld. Egremont how grateful I felt
for his tenderness to my child. He did, and brought back a civil
reply. I consulted Ld. S. about asking Ld. E. to do something towards
getting me the facility of seeing my children. He told me he was a
real good-hearted man, but one who was habitually indolent and to a
degree timid as to meddling in other people’s concerns, but that tho’
he would do nothing for me, yet he was incapable of doing anything
against. However, yesterday, to my great delight, Ld. Stair told me he
had _de son chef_ had a conversation with Ld. E., who not only was
not averse to me, but offered to call and explain all he knew about my
children’s concerns, and would undertake to advise Chaplin to be more
tractable. Ld. Stair advised me to write a letter of acknowledgment to
Ld. E., which I did last night. Thus I have the sanction of one of the
most respectable and worthy persons in my favour.

Sheridan dined with us last Friday; Mrs. S.[128] was to have come, but
she was ill from having sung too much. He was in a very playful vein
of humour, and, without any marked _trait_ of wit, all he said was
pleasant. Lewis was a self-invited guest, to prove to me that he and
William Lamb were cordial friends, who he knew dined with us; but he
failed in that attempt, as Lamb complained that he followed him like
his shadow, and bored him insufferably. Sheridan told a story of a sale
of plants near his house. The trees were ticketed with their names.
Two country gentlemen read a ‘Dacious cypress,’ ‘This must be wrong,’
said one, ‘there is no such word: I will make it right,’ and with his
pencil he wrote ‘_Au_dacious.’ When the little, puny deciduous cypress
appeared with such a tremendous name, the whole auction room shouted
with laughter. He said formerly the managers of the two theatres used
to send people to hiss and disturb the actors at new plays. One night
an actor complained to Garrick that the new tragedy was interrupted
and would get damned, as a Covent Garden man was in the pit laughing.
‘Never mind,’ said Garrick, ‘I shall be revenged, for I have a man fast
asleep at their new comedy.’

Bedford House is pulling down, and the Duke is building a new
square.[129] He has some idea of erecting a statue of Ld. Russell; I
advised him to get Mr. Fox to write the prose inscription, Fitzpatrick
the verse, and Dr. Parr the Latin. If he should raise the monument he
will adopt my hint. Serjeant Lens surprised me by saying that should
this statue be erected, the populace would in all probability pull it
down. If so, public opinion has undergone a strange revolution, as he
was a martyr whom patriots worshipped,--‘That cause for which Russell
and Sidney bled.’

_19th June._--I went yesterday to Hampton Court, where I slept.
Ld. H. rode over to St. Anne’s, and joined me at night. In a small
corner of the Palace erected by William now lives the Stadtholder[130]
and the Princess of Orange, fugitives from those dominions their
ancestor quitted to govern these: a reflection that must be accompanied
with pangs of regret and mortification.

On the 19th, I went by water to Kingston Bridge, where I found my
mother, Sir Gilbert, Henry,[131] and Mr. Francis. In the evening we all
went to the Opera.

[Sidenote: STATE OF THE WAR]

Genoa is taken, Melas seems to have changed positions with Masséna.
Bonaparte is beyond Milan and restoring the Cisalpine Governts.

Francis says whilst the French armies are performing prodigies of
valour, traversing impossible mts., dragging artillery over steep
crags, disposing of empires, extending conquests, etc., we hear our
own exploits, performed by an immense fleet sailing up and down the
Channel, to be a descent upon France, and the victor’s spoil ‘_three
pieces of iron cannon and twenty-five cows_.’ Maitland[132] commands
the expedition which has been directed again against Quiberon; the most
he can do will be to singe here and there the coast of France.

On Thursday, ye 10th July, we quitted home to make an excursion for
two or three months upon the Continent. Our party consists of Ld.
Duncannon,[133] Mr. Marsh, Dr. Drew, Charles, Hortense, Charles,
4 maids, and five men. We manage to stuff all into a coach and
postchaise. We set off at five o’clock in the afternoon, slept at
Epping Place; began our journey the next day at 7. At Newmarket I
saw D. of Queensberry: he wanted us to dine with him. He was violent
at the continuance of the war, and spoke roundly against Ministers.
He told Ld. H., upon the Dutch business, that if he had not made a
determination never to vote against Government he would have voted with
him upon that question. Mr. Vernon also came and sat by me whilst I
eat: he envied my stomach that could digest and relish cold meat and
porter. We stopped at Thetford. The D. of Bedford thought our coming
so uncertain, that he did not hear even of our arrival until 10, and
it was then too late to join us at supper, for we went to bed at ½
past nine. This morning we were up at 4 o’clock, off at 6, and passed
through Norwich (where Ld. D. overtook us), and got here (Yarmouth)
at about 2. Ld. Spencer wrote to order a convoy, but there is some
difficulty about getting a better than a cutter. The Admiral (Dickson)
has just been with me; he promises _two_ cutters, but the lugger
in port is better.

We were landed upon _terra firma_ within fifty hours after we had
sailed from Yarmouth, a surprisingly quiet passage. Met on our way from
the _jettée_ at Cuxhaven, Mr. Arbuthnot; he now is attached to
Prince Augustus. I knew him formerly at Naples when he travelled with
Ld. Digby.

    The party set off that day, and slept at Basbeck, where
    there was no inn. ‘Ld. H. and self lay upon the ground in
    the room we supped in; the gentlemen, Charles, and the
    maids lay in a large room together.’ They took the road to
    Hamburg by Cranz, crossing the Elbe at Blankenese. ‘The
    wind rose and the water was rough; we were about forty
    minutes in the passage.’

[Sidenote: HAMBURG]

We came through Altona to this place (Hamburg) where we are very
tolerably lodged at Kaysershoff. Mr. Berchemeyer, a great merchant,
called to offer us every civility, as did Mr. Parish, the son of the
late American Consul; he belongs to a great house of commerce. In the
evening of the 18th we drove about the ramparts, and went to the French
comedy, a neat theatre with a tolerable _troupe_.

During our stay at Hamburg we received much hospitality and civility.
On the Sunday after our arrival we dined with Mrs. Parish at their
country house upon the banks of ye Elbe. She is a sensible, voluble
Scotchwoman. The party consisted chiefly of merchants; Symons, his wife
and sisters, Flemings and relations of the famous coachbuilder of that
name at Bruxelles. The ladies were recently returned from Paris, but
their attire was such as Bonaparte would have corrected. We returned
early, as the gates shut always at nine, the only one which is left
open until eleven is only attainable by crossing the Alster, a sort of
lake.

Bourgoing,[134] the traveller and author, on his way to his mission to
Copenhagen, demanded of the Senate of Hamburg two French emigrants,
who are conductors of a journal called the _Censeur_, in which
Bonaparte is virulently and clumsily abused. Paul’s Minister, on behalf
of his master, claimed them, and the business is not settled. This is
merely a pendant to our claiming Napper Tandy, for one injustice begets
another.[135] Dumouriez is extremely out of spirits, indeed well may
he be from the absurdity and inconsistency of his conduct. All that
are busy and idle assemble at Hamburg, merchants and sharpers--Major
Semple,[136] Mr. Holcroft,[137] Dr. Maclean,[138] etc. On Wednesday we
dined at Monsr. Mathison’s[139]; he is a wealthy merchant married to
Henriette, one of Mde. Genlis’s _élèves_, and in consequence of
her connection with Ly. Edward[140] is become one of her most cordial
and useful friends. Ly. Ed. lives in his house.

[Sidenote: MADAME DE GENLIS]

Mde. Genlis was just arrived from Berlin; I felt great curiosity to see
a woman so justly celebrated for cleverness. Her countenance denotes
talent and mischief; more of the latter than real vice. She has just
published a new novel, _Les Mères Rivales_; there are some good
things in it, but it is rather tedious from its length. She gives her
political and religious creed, which are curious from the novelty of
her having any. Bourbon monarchy and Papal Catholicism she now holds
to be indispensable to the benefit and salvation of mankind. Permission
has been granted for her return; her own account is that Bonaparte has
ordered her into France from regret that so great an ornament should
seek repose in a foreign country.

On Thursday Dumouriez and Berchemeyer dined with us. In the morning
we went to see Klopstock, the father and founder of German poetry.
He is now near 90 years of age, full of vivacity and as strong in
intellect as he probably ever was. His writings are known throughout
Germany, but are difficult to translate, as they are in the sublime,
incomprehensible style. His _Messiah_ is his greatest work. He
talked to us of English literature, especially of Pope’s Homer.

In the evening we went with Mrs. Parish to the Syndic Dormanne’s
house in the country. It was a day of festivity, being an annual
commemoration of a charitable institution. We laughed at Marsh, who
endeavoured to make a compliment to the Syndic about his house, and
began praising it as a town house, whereas the Syndic had been pointing
out to us the _champêtre_ appearance and the _point de vue
pittoresque_ which it enjoyed. But Marsh persisted in his original
idea, and dwelt upon its excellence considering it was in a populous
town. The truth is the house, tho’ two miles from the city, is one in a
sort of row upon the Alster.

    They left Hamburg on July 24, to go by Hanover to Berlin,
    crossing the Elbe at Tollenspicker. ‘The carriage came
    over in the regular ferry boat, which is of a singular
    construction considering that the waves are sometimes
    high; the ends are both open. Marsh and Duncannon bought a
    horse between them, which keeps up with German travelling,
    a proof of its rapidity!’ They slept the first night at
    Lüneburg. The road to Zell lay through a stretch of forest
    land, but sparsely inhabited, ‘not more than three villages
    sprinkled over an extent of thirty miles.’ Lady Holland
    says, ‘On the whole it is the worst country I ever saw, and
    naturally so incapable of improvement that it would baffle
    the agricultural skill of our English improvers.’

From Zell to Hanover two posts: we were eight hours. Saw nothing but
forests of diminutive firs, deep sands, and barren wastes. In fifty
years there may perhaps be a tolerable road; at present all that
appears is that probability. The _chaussée_ is marked out, trees were
planted, and even in some places stones are collected in heaps, but
only here and there for about a hundred yards are any laid on the road;
and where there is that small portion of _pavé_, it seems merely to be
a pretext for a heavy toll. Well may these Hanoverian surveyors boast,
as did one of the French patriots, that they labour for posterity!

Arrived at Hanover ye 27th July, 1800.

_28th._--The King’s stables, or rather stud, are very fine. It is from
hence he is supplied with the white and cream-coloured horses which
draw his state coach; they are beautiful animals, but have a diseased,
unhealthy look, especially about the eyes, which have a reddish hue.
The breed of horses and men are alike, and I could trace a likeness
to my liege Lord and Sovereign among his coach horses. They breed
good-sized mules from Italian asses. I was surprised at finding them
so good in this cold climate, for tho’ as hot as Italy now, the cold
in winter is insufferable. The riding house is large and grand; one or
two riding masters were busy _dresser_ these _manège_ horses. It is a
graceful action, a man on a well-dressed horse, and it is much to the
loss of our young men that the slouching fashion of riding gets the
better of the _manège_ method. The boys hoot at Duncannon and Marsh,
and abuse them for their ignorance of riding, calling out jeeringly
‘Englan_der_.’

    [Sidenote: HANOVER]

Saw a beautiful palace built by the D. of York, sold by him to one
Eckhart, an army commissary, and repurchased by the King; and now
occupied by Prince Adolphus.[141] It is exactly like a Paris hotel; the
whole was executed under the direction of a French architect, and the
furniture and decorations brought from Paris and Lyons. The Electoral
Palace is old, irregular, and vast. One of the inner courts was
destroyed by fire, and rebuilt by George II. In his private apartment
they showed us the altar he commonly used, which had been rescued
from the flames; it was very much scorched. His common walking cane
the _concierge_ kissed with veneration, adding, ‘_He_ loved us, _he_
lived among us.’ The Hanoverians are short-sighted enough to regret
not having their Sovereign among them; they long for the splendour of
a Court, without taking into account that his residence would entail
taxes, burthens of various sorts, and perhaps wars.

A dark passage between the ball-room and the Electress’s private
apartments is shown as the spot where Königsmark was murdered. He had
slipped out from the festive scene to indulge in the softer delights of
love in the arms of the Electress; on his return he was rushed upon by
the guards with their halberds, and dispatched. Various stories were
invented, some that he was put into an oven and suffocated, another
that he was thrust into a reservoir and drowned, another that the
Elector (George I.) kept him to enjoy ye sight of his torture, etc.
True it was that he disappeared, and that the Electress was banished
her husband’s presence and exiled to a castle at _All_ or Aller.[142]
She was never permitted to go to England, or assume the title of Queen.
Some time afterwards B. Hoadly to satisfy the royal suspicions wrote
the play of _The Suspicious Husband_, which proves that a gentleman may
be in a lady’s bedroom at night most innocently. Königsmark was but a
_mauvais sujet_; he had run off from England for murder. He shot Mr.
Thynne in Hyde Park to prevent his marrying an heiress he had designs
upon.[143]

In the evening we went to drink tea with P. Adolphus at Montbrilliant.
He is remarkably handsome and pleasing in his manner, and since the
decline of the Prince’s beauty, is certainly the best looking of the
Royal Family. He complains of being exiled. He left England when he
was 12 years old, and since that time has only been there for four
months. I renewed my acquaintance with Count Münster and Tatter, two
Hanoverians whom I had formerly known at Rome when they were attached
to Prince Augustus.

When we arrived at Brunswick we found the inns filled with Jews and
infidels on account of the Fair, which is a great epoch in German
festivity. We, however, obtained a tolerable lodging. Mr. Kinnaird is
living in a _Swiss_ pension, imbibing Genevan principles; these upon a
Scotch _fond_ will produce a useful man to _himself_ and family.

    [Sidenote: BRUNSWICK]

A most gracious invitation from the Court immediately on our arrival
being known; we dined there the next day. The Duke is a worthy nephew
of the great Frederick’s; but for the unfortunate invasion of France,
he would have been in addition to the best general of his time the most
successful.[144] His countenance marks a man of great talent. He is
reckoned reserved, but his good breeding prevents it from falling into
coldness. The Dss. is a most excellent, prating, good-hearted woman,
very like her brother the King, full as talkative and inquisitive, but
much less discreet. She rattled away upon all subjects. She put many
distressing questions to me about the P. and Pss., especially as to the
renewal of the _amour_ with Mrs. Fitzherbert, about which I expressed
the most profound ignorance. She could not conceal her dislike of the
Queen, whom she called haughty and proud of her station, as she was but
the daughter of an inferior Prince of Mecklenburg, an appanage of the
family.

After dinner the Dss. desired I would join her to pass the eve. at
Mde. Deodati’s, a dull card assembly. The weather was very hot. Poor
Drew fell ill, and kept his bed; a fever and spasms. On Thursday we
dined again at Court. In the evening went to the French comedy: a
very pretty theatre; afterwards to Mr. Des Arte, merely to please Mr.
Kinnaird, who is living with him. Mr. Ridley, a good-humoured young
man, K.’s fellow-traveller. On Friday received another invitation to
dine at Court; I wrote a letter of acknowledgment and apology to the
good Duchess. Drew was better, and we set off to Helmstadt. On the
right-hand side of the road a building with four painted towers, which
belies its warlike appearance, as it is nominally the seat of peace
and bliss--a convent; tho’ in fact hatred and discord sojourn chiefly
within such walls, and Ariosto was scarcely satiric when he makes the
angel seek discord in a monastery. Upon second thoughts I believe he
sought indolence, not discord. He might, however, have named both; one
is suspended only by the other.

    The first night was spent at Helmstadt, the second at
    Magdeburg. ‘Magdeburg is the frontier town on Prussian
    territory. It was sacked by the barbarous Tilly at the
    beginning of the bloody wars under Gustavus Adolphus, and
    it has since afforded a prison to La Fayette, who lived a
    year in the citadel, before he was transferred to a more
    rigorous jailor, the Emperor.’

    Zefur, their next halt. ‘We went to the worst inn, where
    we were abominably cheated and abominably lodged.’ They
    reached Potsdam at one o’clock the next night.

We went to the Palaces. I saw them about four years ago, but as they
are very fine I did not dislike another visit to them. The Great
Palace contains rooms as superb as any in Versailles, and may vie with
those at Rome and Genoa. Sans Souci, the retreat of Frederick, is a
delightful habitation. His apartment is entire: his private library
(consisting solely of French books) is untouched. In his bedroom the
only picture is a portrait of Gustavus Adolphus; in an adjoining room
a bronze bust of Charles XII. of Sweden. I paid my homage to the
apartment of Voltaire. He occupied it many years, until he capriciously
quarrelled with his Royal patron.

[Sidenote: SANS SOUCI]

Close by the windows of Frederick’s private apartments are the
monuments of his dogs--large flat stones with their names simply
inscribed upon them. Near is a space he allotted to himself, as he
desired to be interred amidst these barking favourites; but his
successor wisely disobeyed the injunction, and gave the atheistical
Monarch Christian burial. Marsh was furious. I thought the profanation
of giving the form of tombstone was the provocation, or the marked
contempt of sacred rites in desiring to be buried in the centre of his
dogs, but I suspect his anger proceeded from some other cause, his
marked preference for those animals above his fellow creatures.

_Wednesday, 6th August._--Road to Berlin excellent; arrived to dinner
at ½ past one. When I was there four years ago I only stayed a couple
of days, but barely sufficient to see the public buildings. Ld.
Carysfort,[145] the English Minister, and family were just arrived.
It is a new career for him, and one he enters into to repair the
derangement of a small fortune and owes to the interest of his wife,
who is Ld. Grenville’s sister. Mr. Garlike, poor Spencer’s friend, had
been Chargé d’Affaires. He is a mild, gentlemanlike man; he remains on
as Secretary to the Legation. Ld. H. had formerly been a good deal in
the Berlin society, particularly at Prince Ferdinand’s,[146] to whom he
made himself known, and we went there one evening to supper. The Pss.
is very talkative, and seems cross and clever.

I sent my card to Ly. C. as wife to the protector of the English, a
respect usual and due to the office; she did not return hers. It seemed
an unnecessary rudeness, but I presume she did as I did, viz., what we
each thought right to be done. Ld. C. invited the gentlemen to dinner;
Ld. H. refused civilly. I was confined to my bed and to the house for a
few days with a sharp fever and sore throat, ill enough to take James’s
powders and bark. I went to the German play, not a word of which could
I comprehend.

By mere accident we were introduced to their Prussian Majesties[147] in
the gardens of Charlottenburg. Ld. H. and Duncannon had missed their
presentation to the King by coming too late. He was going into Silesia,
and another day had not been fixed. I did not dream of being presented
to the Queen. However, during our walk we saw her glide like a nymph,
with a child in each hand, along the Terrace; soon after Mde. de Voss,
her _Gde. Maîtresse_, came and spoke to me and asked our names, which
as soon as she heard she offered to introduce us to the Queen. We
accordingly had the pleasure of seeing a most lovely woman; her figure
is the finest I ever saw, her manner very affable and easy. She told
me she was sorry we were going away from Berlin, but invited us back
in three weeks to the reviews. The King came up to us; he is a fine,
stout, soldier-like looking man. They are extremely attached to each
other; it was unlike Royal marriages, but was a union of love. She is a
Pss. of Mecklenburg. The children played and kissed Charles, who seemed
to abate his usual shyness in their favour.

At the Pss. Ferdinand’s at Bellevue I made acquaintance with Mde.
du Néal, whom I liked extremely. We had some thoughts of going to
Rheinsberg, the residence of Prince Henry;[148] she fortified us in
the idea, and offered letters to her two nieces, who compose part of
his Court. Mr. Bruce, Ld. Elgin’s brother, lodged in our hotel; he is
going back to India by way of Constantinople, where he means to visit
his brother; he dined with us. Ld. H. invited him out of good nature,
from hearing he was solitary and unacquainted with the society of
Berlin. Baron Schack, a _gens d’armes_ [_sic_], to whom we had been
civil in London, was at Berlin; he was too much occupied with love,
gambling, and military duties to be of much service to us.

[Sidenote: RHEINSBERG]

Determined to go to Rheinsberg. Set off at 12 o’clock at night on
Wednesday, 17th August. Left Charles and Drew: they were to go to
Potsdam. We were to join them there. Ld. Duncannon and myself went in
the open carriage; Ld. H., Marsh, and Hortense in the chaise; ye coach
and three servants left with Drew and Charles.

As soon as we reached Rheinsberg on Thursday eve. we went to the
inn, and sent out letters to the ladies and Count Brühl, one of the
Chamberlains. They were all at the _spectacle_, but the gentlemen came
out and invited us from the Prince to lodge in his _château_ and to
join him at the play. The latter was rather inconvenient as we had no
clothes with us (the other carriage being behind), besides that we had
travelled all night, and were dinnerless. Those difficulties were soon
settled, and we got in time to see the _Petite Pièce_.

The Prince is one of the most remarkable men in Germany; he
distinguished himself in his brother’s wars as a consummate general,
and may boast of having done that which is almost unparalleled, of
having put a French army to flight; at Rosbach they fled before him. He
is 75 years old, and possesses a strength and vivacity of intellect
equal to what he formerly enjoyed. He is a Frenchman in his heart,
he abhors everything German; cannot speak it. He has a delightful
French comedy; his _troupe_ of comedians is really good, the theatre
remarkably pretty. I never passed five days more delightfully than
under his hospitable roof.

The ladies we found clever, handsome, accomplished, and witty, and
endowed with some qualities so rare and captivating that they inspired
a sincere attachment. Mde. de la Rocheaimon is so perfectly pleasing,
good-hearted, sensible, and amiable, that I never yet saw the person
before whom I wished to have been my sister. I should like to pass many
of my future days in her society. Her cousin, Mde. Peneval, is witty
and highly accomplished; she is more _spirituelle_ than the other, and
the other is merrier. She is the widow of a French officer, who was
attached to the service of P. Henry; upon his death she was penniless
with three children. The Prince continues her husband’s pension,
lodging, etc.; the more kind, as she is, as she says, ‘La première
femme qui ait trouvé grâce auprès de lui.’ His weakness does not lie in
his love for the female sex.

We supped in a Chinese temple in the garden. It was illuminated,
and we had some excellent French horns playing in the wood; it was
delicious. The next morning we breakfasted by the lake; I bathed in it.
The Prince, and indeed the whole party, did every earthly thing they
could imagine would please us; I never experienced such warm-hearted,
zealous, unaffected desire of obliging as they manifested towards us.
He gave us extra plays, and, in short, did the utmost of his power to
convince us how much he was pleased at our visit. Rheinsberg is the
place where Frederick II. wrote his _Anti-Machiavel_, and where he
lived during the latter end of his father’s life.

[Sidenote: AN UNNECESSARY ALARM]

Drew grew uncomfortable at staying alone at Potsdam, and employed a
certain but alarming method of abridging our pleasure; he said Charles
was ill. We set off on Tuesday morning, perfectly persuaded we should
find the dear boy, if not quite well, yet at the worst only slightly
ill, but we would not risk the possibility of his being really ill, so
we went. We travelled all night and reached Potsdam at seven o’clock on
Wednesday. Found Charles feverish, but not worse than he has been fifty
times since his birth.

    They left Potsdam two days later, passing through a dreary
    country to Wittenberg and on to Torgau. From thence to
    Leipsic and Dresden.

We quitted Dresden on Thursday, the 18th of September; dined early
before we set off and got in two hours and a half to Meissen. During
the night Elliot[149] sent us an _estafette_ with our English letters,
among them one from Mr. Moore to tell us the application for leave for
us to pass through France was referred from the Duke of Portland’s
office to Ld. Grenville’s; one from Mr. Fawkener saying that there were
obstacles, but he hoped they might be removed.[150]

   They left next day for Weimar.

We arrived at Weimar between one and two. We passed the Dowager
Duchess’s palace, which stands to the left of the road. I had a
letter to D. Dss.,[151] but my low spirits about my eyes determined
us to go on as fast as we could to Cassel, there to wait the decision
whether to go by Cuxhaven home or by Calais. Dined; drove to Moutier’s
establishment at Bellevue. Since the Jacobinism has prevailed so
universally in the German Universities, young men go to this sort of
private Academy. We drove about and walked in the English garden,
which was made under the inspection of the famous Goethe, author of
_Werther_, and Prime Minister of this Duchy. Mr. Lawrence[152] called
in the evening; he is a whimsical young man, who has written several
strange things, but not wholly without talent. Ld. H. sent a letter to
Wieland to solicit his acquaintance, but he was in the country.

[Sidenote: OBLIGING OFFICIALS]

On arrival at Cassel Holland and Marsh called upon the French Minister,
_le citoyen Rivale_, who was remarkably civil, and gave the passport
from Bournonville. The passport is made out in the most marked and
obliging manner, everything troublesome omitted, no time limited, no
descriptions of our persons, and the route left blank for us to fill
up to Paris if we choose. The Secretary of Legation, Senurier, was
very good-natured to me. I had heard stories of robberies committed
by deserters beyond the French frontier but within their line of
demarcation, which rather alarmed me, and made me wish to have an
escort if possible. He accordingly gave a letter to any commander we
might find before Coblentz. Mr. Lorentz, the banker, very useful and
civil: he dined with us, managed about money, as it is illegal to draw
upon England from French territory.

    They started again on the 26th, and reached Weilburg on
    the 28th. ‘I saw French proclamations posted up in the
    villages, signed _Augereau_.’ They slept that night at
    Montabaur.

We got off early on ye 29th. Woods to Coblentz. Met a French general,
escorted by cavalry. Wood chiefly copse, country much inferior in
beauty to that we quitted. Ehrenbreitstein repairing; the village
under the fortress quite ruined, churches and convents unroofed and
demolished, but the peasants are active in repairing their habitations.
Ld. H. showed his passport and had a pass given for persons and horses
to cross the Rhine. Crossed in the _pont-volant_: all of us and our
baggage stopped at the Custom House. I went to the inn with Charles.
Ld. H. went to the banker; some difficulty in arranging about money
for Bruxelles. Mr. Lorentz rather in fault. Ld. H. showed passport in
the evening to the _Préfet_, Boucqueau, who was remarkably well-bred
and civil. Banker’s name Botsgeissen; married to a Leeds woman.
The Electoral Palace in the town is converted into a hospital. The
inhabitants pay great contributions; it falls hardest on landholders.
The German play driven out by a French _troupe_, who have established
a French _spectacle_. The establishment of juries seemingly popular.
Heard of a famous robber towards Trêves, who maintained banditti,
bribed peasants, and gave passports, and who is particularly inveterate
against the Jews. Country cultivated, and provisions, at least bread,
very cheap. Very different accounts of the French, but all agreeing in
the improvement since Bonaparte, and in wishes for peace. The people
are allowed great freedom of speech; they paid more for having given
an asylum to the emigrants, which seemed very unjust upon them. All
religion tolerated and none interfered with; monks as usual, but I saw
none. The inn excellent, quite new; not the same as the one I used to
go to....

I laughed heartily at the sight of a monk with a French cockade in his
hat. To the left, about a mile from Bonn, there is a fine castle upon
an eminence. The modern _châteaux_ of the nobility are deserted, and
many totally destroyed from being unroofed and _gutted_. The Elector’s
country palace was magnificent; it is now converted into a hospital.
Bonn is a clean, well-built town, the Palace immense, now inhabited
in parts by officers and magistrates, but chiefly falling to decay.
The Tree of Liberty decorated with the tricolour flag. I was surprised
instead of finding the old inn, which was very good, to find a new one
just built upon a most magnificent scale. The road from Coblentz to
Bonn is good; from Bonn to Cologne sandy and deep, country flat, but
rich and well cultivated.

A mile or two before Cologne a bend of the river extremely beautiful.
Wrote our names at the gates; one of the guard was a drunken Irishman,
who with the rest of the vagrant scum of Europe composed the _Polish
legion_. Cologne is a large, gloomy town, overrun with monks and
beggars. The inn was excellent; it had just been repaired and newly
furnished. We were surprised that, considering the interruption there
must have been to travelling, accommodations and post horses should
have been so good and abundant. We went to the play, which was bad
enough, but like all foreign theatres well attended. The _gendarmes_
and hussars very handsome; we agreed that the French officers were
better looking than formerly. The reason, I suppose, is that under the
_ancien régime_ the officers were chiefly noble; now a man is taken out
of the ranks and dubbed General....

[Sidenote: STEPHEN’S DEATH]

_Sunday, Jan. 25, 1801, Staines Inn._--The complaint in my eyes and
alarm about my poor child prevented me from enjoying myself during the
last two months of my foreign excursion. After passing many watchful
nights, and latterly for 8 together, by the side of my dear boy, he was
snatched from me, alas, for ever.[153] He died on the day devoted to
mirth, his dear father’s birthday. On ye 22nd early, we quitted H. H.,
and took up our residence at Ld. B.’s in Cavendish Square during their
absence at Chatsworth. I was broken-hearted and dispirited for many
weeks.

Soon after, Charles caught the measles, and luckily for my peace of
mind had them most favourably. His little endearing qualities, and
Ld. H.’s affection, the kindness of friends, and the hope of having
more children, have to a degree soothed my feelings, but oh! my God,
what anguish can equal the pang a mother feels who sees her infant
struggling against death. What I have endured worlds should not bribe
me to undergo again. Beauclerk, as soon as he heard of our distress,
came to town to see us, and with real heartfelt interest entered into
our sorrows. Mrs. Smith showed herself affectionate and tender: and
the D. of Bedford continued in town, and stayed as much with us as
possible; indeed, day after day he devoted to being in our company.
We had taken a mere nutshell, a _pied-à-terre_, in Stratton Street;
my spirits have been so low that the small and varying society that I
got of evenings from those that drop in amuses and cheers me. I write
at this moment at Staines, where I am with Charles and Ld. H., partly
that the first may be shown to his uncle, and partly that Ld. H. may
see _his_ uncle, and endeavour, with Grey, to prevail upon him to
resume his parliamentary functions.

_Stratton Street, 30th Jan., 1801._--A rumpus in the Cabinet, supposed
about the Catholics. The opening of the Imperial Parliament[154] has
been delayed already three times, and the day for which it is fixed
at present is not the one it will, according to all expectation, meet
upon. Various reasons are assigned for the delay, and the wise-heads
are full of strange and curious speculations upon the occasion. Some
imagine Ministers are negotiating, not to obtain peace, but to get a
reply from Bonaparte declaring his intention of maintaining the demand
of the Northern Confederacy with respect to neutral bottoms, by which
they will succeed in making the Northern war popular with the country.
Others, that great concessions have been made to Russia to withdraw her
from the confederacy, even to the sacrifice of Hanover. Others, that
the King is more in want of Dr. Willis[155] than of his Lords Temporal
and Spiritual assembled in High Parliament.

It is a curious circumstance to reflect upon, that in the course of
a very few years France, whom we expected to crush and entered into
a league against with half the powers of Europe, should now have so
completely turned the tables upon us as to head triumphantly the most
formidable combination that was ever undertaken. If the King of Prussia
marches to Hamburg (which unquestionably is his object), and the French
compel the Portuguese to renounce our alliance, we shall not have a
friendly port from the North Pole to Africa.

[Sidenote: SECESSION ABANDONED]

Opposition mean to attend actively this session. Grey has renounced
the errors of secession, and tho’ Fox still hangs back, I think a few
strong divisions will be irresistible and make him return to the career
in which he has outstripped every competitor. Ld. Darnley has attached
himself with warmth to Opposition, and intends to bring on a motion
upon the State of the Nation. To-day has brought another convert, Ld.
Fitzwilliam,[156] who has expressed a wish of moving the amendment, one
very hostile to Ministers and, strange to say, full of pacific wishes.
His respectability, high name, and integrity of character carries
great weight, and will add much to the slender forces of a disjointed,
disbanded Opposition. The D. of Bedford pledges himself to nothing,
but his inclination leads him to attend and would conquer, but for Ld.
Lauderdale’s jokes, who is always telling him he delights in making a
long prose to the House of Lords, for which he never indulges himself
on any question but on those that would make Cicero or Fox prose,
_scarcity_, poor laws, enclosures, etc., etc.

Ld. Wycombe, who obtained passports to go through France in his way to
Florence to get witnesses, was at Paris during the explosion of the
_infernal car_, and within 220 paces of it at the moment of its blowing
up.[157]

_11th Feb., 1801. Stratton Street._--During the Rebellion in Ireland
made by the United Irishmen, it used to be the phrase, when a
disturbance broke out in a town, to say, ‘They have got the Union among
them.’ That cant saying might now be applied to a higher sphere, as
since the Union of the Kingdoms the Cabinet has been divided, and at
this juncture broken up. Reports and opinions are so different and
various that I can collect nothing that gives me a very distinct idea.
At present all that can be depended upon is that Pitt, Grenville,
Dundas, Windham, Lds. Camden and Spencer, have resigned their
places, and are virtually out of office, altho’ the former remains
in until he has made the loan and opened the Budget. The occasion of
this extraordinary breaking up of the Administration is the King’s
peremptory refusal of assenting to the Emancipation of the Catholics,
a measure Ministers consider themselves as pledged to, and a promise
of which was one of ye instruments of conciliation to all parties to
obtain the Union.

[Sidenote: PITT’S RESIGNATION]

It now appears that the King was all along against the Union,
foreseeing that this question would be the price of it. It appears
incredible that Ministers should esteem themselves so irrevocably
bound to the Catholics, when the opinion of the King has uniformly
been against complying with that measure, which they must have known
at the time they held out the promise to the Irish. The King believes,
and the belief so inculcated is sedulously maintained in his mind
by the Bishops (especially by ye Archbishop of Canterbury and Dr.
Stuart,[158] the Primate of Ireland), that any such relaxation towards
the Catholics is incompatible with his Coronation oath. It was owing
to these differences that the meeting of Parlt. was delayed on account
of the tenor of the Speech. Pitt wanted it to breathe toleration and
indulgence in the true spirit of amity; the King absolutely rejected
all such promises. During the week in which the Speech was adjusting,
there were many rumours of a change of Administration; indeed, one
day they were so current that I believed enough to be tempted to
send to Lansdown House to ascertain whether its noble owner had been
sent for from Bath. Several tradesmen distributed their commodities
gratis, so great was the joy; but on the Saturday previous to the
meeting of Parlt. all was supposed to be amicably settled owing to the
interposition of the Speaker, who was closeted with the King several
hours during the Queen’s concert. However this honourable friend was
occupied in a different negotiation than that designed for him by
his munificent patron and employer--in one no less surprising and
despicable than of tripping up his heels and offering his services
to replace him. This huge and monstrous act of ingratitude was known
publicly last Saturday, and Pitt on Monday, in his place, announced
his resignation, and Ld. Grenville last night in the House of Lords
spoke to the same effect. Nothing is yet known certainly as to the new
Ministry; many of the places cannot be filled, and the opinion is they
cannot hold together a month. Ld. Carlisle refused; at least he was
sounded. Ld. Macartney refused. Jekyll said an Administration, formed
out of the dregs of the old one and leaving Pitt out, was like getting
up _The Beggar’s Opera_ without the character of Macheath.

_14th Feb., 1801._--Yesterday was a political fast ordered by
Parliament during the continuance of the war. Jekyll wrote _ex
tempore_:--

    Why on this day the lot d’ye cast
    To mortify the _British_ nation,
    When every day’s a general fast
    And every hour’s humiliation?

(_British_ added by Lewis to make the metre.)

Some person asked Jekyll why he did not put the Administration into
verse, upon which he said it was already _inverse_.

_Feb. 26, 1801._--The first laugh over, people begin to think this
Administration may last, and if they commence a negotiation they will
even become popular. Pitt, however, is regretted, and there are those
who think the whole a juggle, that he is, in fact, Minister behind the
curtain; but these are refinements. He certainly solicits persons to
take office, and his own friends to hold those they have; but this is
but a shallow artifice to prevent the odious cry of his deserting the
King. The new Ministers like to let it appear that Pitt is cordial to
them, and account for the resignations by saying those who resign are
chiefly of Canning’s faction, and that Pitt has reprimanded Canning for
his intemperate language.

Lady Buckingham[159] (the Marchioness), the first drawing room after
these changes, went to give thanks for her peerage (Baroness Nugent,
with remainder to her second son); she is a bigoted Catholic, and gave
great scandal during her husband’s government in Ireland by attending
the R. C. Chapel openly. When she stood in the circle to be spoken to,
the King came up to her and began a conversation, in the midst of which
she turned upon her heel and said aloud to the person next to her, ‘I
think I have treated him coldly enough.’ His Majesty heard her, and
in an irritated tone said, ‘I don’t mind women’s politics.’ Those who
are for Catholic Emancipation affect to believe that the discontents
upon its rejection will break out, and an invasion from France will be
successful.

This opinion produced a _bon mot_ from a man who never made one before.
A person asked Lord Brome[160] who was to succeed his father (Ld.
Cornwallis) in Ireland. ‘Most probably _Bonaparte_,’ replied the youth.

Lady Clare began abusing Ld. Cornwallis furiously before the Duchess of
Gordon, who coolly answered that she ‘had never heard him abused but
for two things, one was the not putting the town of Seringapatam to
the sword, the other, that in Ireland he never whipped nor tortured.’
The retort was keen, as Lord Clare[161] made a speech in favour of the
enormities committed by the Orangemen, which is called and known by the
name of ‘The torture speech.’

[Sidenote: THE KING’S ILLNESS]

_8th March, 1801._--The King is recovering as fast as he can, say the
courtiers; Pitt’s people cautiously say he may amend, but it must
be slowly; Opposition declare he is as mad as the winds. Upon the
first signal of madness the Prince notified to Ld. Fitzwilliam that
circumstances were similar to those in ’88–’89 and that it was his
intention to consult those who had been his friends at that period, and
he wished Ld. F. to discuss it over with those with whom he had acted
at that period. Ld. F., rather precipitately, sent off an express to
St. Anne’s to fetch up Fox, who came early the next morning. Ld. Moira
saw Grey and the D. of Bedford (separately) and proposed to each the
formation of an Administration in case of a Regency, without either
Fox or Pitt. This they declined, and unequivocally declared they would
never take office unless Fox was the efficient man in the Cabinet. Ld.
Moira had a private interview afterwards with Fox, in which nothing
very material passed. The Chancellor begged to see Fox that they might
refer back to their joint proceedings in ’88: Fox was astonished at the
C.’s want of memory. He did not think his forgetfulness was wilful.
In the course of their meeting, Loughborough gave him to understand
that he was authorised to express Pitt’s wishes for an accommodation
in private, and his disposition to adjust their differences of opinion
upon the question of right, but Fox declined the interview on hearing
the arguments, adding that the House of Commons was the proper place
for political opponents to debate in.

Pitt is still Minister. The King’s illness occurred on Saturday, and
the patent to admit Addington was to have been signed on Thursday:
thus Addington has given up an immense place of £7000 pr. ann., and
undergone the expense of his election, for the bare honour of having
been thought worthy of His Majesty’s confidence.[162] Windham says he
is one of the gentlemen who are _shut in_. Those only who are fairly
out are Lord Spencer and Ld. Grenville.

The first act of Ld. St. Vincent’s Administration[163] was a pretty
hard rap at Ld. Spencer’s; he gave the command of the Channel fleet to
Ad. Cornwallis,[164] a man whom Ld. S. had brought to a Court martial
and in a manner laid aside and disgraced.

Ly. Spencer[165] cannot reconcile herself to the insignificance
of being out of power; she is carrying on an intrigue with Mrs.
Fitzherbert thro’ Jack Payne to reinstate Mr. Pitt, by making him
acceptable to the Prince. Ly. S. is the greatest prude alive, and
yet because it is her interest she passes many hours daily with Mrs.
F.[166] The latter is rancorous against Fox; she has never pardoned
his compliance with the Prince’s orders in the last Regency, when he
declared that no marriage had taken place between them.

_9th March._--A person said to the Duchess of Gordon that Pitt, now
he was out of office, would have leisure to amuse himself and indulge
in his favourite recreations. Among the latter _Pope Joan_ was named.
‘Aye,’ said the Dss., ‘I wish he would think more of _Joan_ and less of
the Pope’--more of the ladies and less of the Catholics.

[Sidenote: MR. GEORGE PONSONBY]

George Ponsonby, distinguished in Ireland as a pleader and orator, has
carried the election for the County of Wicklow. During the poll a man
upon the hustings assigned for reason of his voting against him that
_common report_ said he had been connected with the United Irishmen.
‘_Common report_ is known to be a liar,’ said Ponsonby, ‘and so, I
think, are its trumpeters.’ More is expected from him in the Imperial
Parlt., than from all the Irish put together; his talents are supposed
to be well adapted to the English style of debate, and his language
good without being too florid, the common defect of Irish eloquence. He
is cautious, and will not hastily risk impairing the reputation he has
already acquired. Mr. Fox has not the highest opinion of his political
honesty, but Grey, who loves with fervour every person connected
with him, is jealous at the suspicion.[167] We must wait to see how
opportunity may tempt and time mature his propensities.

Horne Tooke has at length got into Parlt. for the rotten borough of Old
Sarum, through the patronage of Lord Camelford. Ld. Temple has given
notice of a motion to investigate into his eligibility; the question is
whether he can sit in Parlt. after having taken priest’s orders. He has
already spoken frequently, but his wit suits the mob at the hustings
better than the genteel mob of Parlt. He is too fond of talking of
himself, and his jokes are trite. He made formerly a very satirical
good joke in a toast, and it was so well disguised that what is very
Jacobinical appears extremely loyal--‘_The brave followers of the Duke
of York_,’ meaning the _French_, who pursued him when his army was put
to flight in Holland. It will be a good expulsion for ye Opposition, as
he is very mischievous, and would overset any little popularity they
might acquire if they could conduct themselves with tolerable prudence.

_11th March._--Lord Morpeth is to be married in a few days to Lady
Georgina Cavendish, a suitable match in every respect. Without
possessing great beauty she has many charms, and is so well disposed
that _il a beau jeu_ before him, if he will renounce _le gros jeu_, but
it unfortunately happens that love only suspends that passion when it
has taken deep root. However, he has so good an understanding and such
right feelings, that what a man can do to conquer a vicious habit he
will do.

[Sidenote: A MOTHER’S SORROWS]

The loss of my child sits heavily upon me, my heart is oftentimes
overflowing, and my health very much impaired. The system that
Sr. Walter Farquhar[168] has put me upon is calculated to rouse my
constitution, but grief and a certain natural morbid tendency may
baffle all his endeavours. My Charles is delicate, and has frequent
and severe attacks: anxiety for him and regrets for my poor Ste. make
the hours of reflection and solitude pass sorrowfully over. There is a
sensation in a mother’s breast at the loss of an infant that partakes
of the feeling of instinct. It is a species of savage despair. Alas! to
lose my pretty infant, just beginning to prattle his little innocent
wishes, and imagination so busily aids my grief by tracing what he
might have been. In those dreary nights whilst I sat watching his
disturbed sleep, I knelt down and poured out to God a fervent prayer
for his recovery, and swore that if he were spared me the remainder of
my life should be devoted to the exercise of religious duties; that I
should believe in the mercy of a God who could listen to and alleviate
my woe. Had he lived I should have been a pious enthusiast. I have no
superstition in my nature, but from what I then felt it is obvious how
the mind may be worked upon when weakened and perplexed by contending
passions of fear, hope, and terror.

Ah! my child, perhaps if I had not left you in the summer, but stayed
and watched with maternal care all your little ailments, I might have
had you still; but the disease was inveterate. He was opened, and his
fatal malady ascertained--two tubercles upon his lung, and a pint of
water upon his chest. The surgeon and medical men who attended thought
the disease was inherent, and that nothing could have saved him, but
even in the most inveterate hereditary diseases life is prolonged
to a very advanced period by care. But it is over, and regret is now
superfluous.

An interesting play, taken from the French, is now acting with success
at Drury Lane.[169] The story is of a deaf and dumb boy found in the
streets of Paris, who became from his infirmities a pupil of the
celebrated Abbé d’Epée, who discovers great intelligence in the boy,
and from various circumstances suspects he is of high origin, but
abandoned from motives of interest by his family. This he infers from
his distress at the meanness of his clothes, his expressions of delight
at seeing a Chief Magistrate, whom he gives his patron to understand
resembles in dress one who used to caress him. From a variety of
incidents the Abbé at length traces that he is the orphan of a great
magistrate, defrauded of his rights by a false guardian. I only mention
the piece to show the spirit of the times.

The first night it was played, Theodore, the orphan, to show his
talents, is asked to give his opinion who is the greatest genius France
has produced. He replied, in writing, ‘For science, D’Alembert, wit,
Voltaire, sentiment, Rousseau.’ This was deemed Jacobinical, and it
is now strangely transposed, ‘For science, Pascal, wit, Boileau, and
_sentiment_, _Montesquieu_.’ This is absurd, but, much as it is so, the
fury of the times is very much abated within these few years, or rather
year.

[Sidenote: LADY OXFORD]

Lady Oxford passed a few days here with her daughter and sisters, and
by a harmless _supercherie_ she contrived that Sir Francis Burdett
should be invited, a scheme I disliked, as she is so gentle and good
that it pains me to see her a prey to him. Knight was here also. To
use a vulgar phrase, he has corrupted her mind by filling her head
with innumerable vain conceits, and teaching her to exclaim against
institutions, especially that of marriage, to which she says she has
been a helpless victim. If I were to see much of her she might perhaps
be benefited, for as nobody can do more mischief to a woman than a
woman, so perhaps might one reverse the maxim and say nobody can do
more good. A little mild reproof and disapprobation of some of her
doctrines might possibly rescue her from the gulf.

Soon after Fox’s arrival in March (as mentioned already somewhere
in these scrawls) a negotiation was set on foot to bring together
all the opposers of Governt. to procure a degree of concert in their
proceedings. Tierney was instrumental in getting Ld. Moira and Ld.
Lansdown together. Soon after, a numerous meeting at the house of the
former was held, where Fox, D. of Bedford, Grey, and others all came
to an agreement as to their mode of acting in case of a Regency. The
King recovered unexpectedly and rapidly, and the zealous _Patriots_
dispersed.

Ld. Moira is offended, and thinks himself ill-used by the desertion of
his new allies, who, immediately upon the chance of getting into power
becoming more distant, each fled and followed his own devices. Tierney
also is discontented, and declares himself no longer a party man,
wishing it universally to be understood that he will not consider Fox
as his leader.

Previous to the King’s illness I was witness to rather an unpleasant
scene at my own house between him and Grey, where the D. of Bedford was
the moderator. The immediate cause of the dispute was that Sheridan
most unjustifiably repeated and _added unto_ a conversation held
over a table when most of the hearers and talkers were drunk. The
origin of the quarrel, however, was more remote. Tierney came into
Parlt. entirely by his own talents, neither owed his election or his
success in the Committee to the interference of any of his political
friends. Shortly after his becoming permanently seated, secession began
to be rumoured; he had spoken several times, but had not then much
distinguished himself. Fox still attending of course made him diffident
of putting himself too forward, nor probably had he acquired the
facility of speaking or weight enough to claim the notice of the House.
At a meeting held in Mr. Fox’s house upon the measure of seceding,
he offered to resign his seat, adding that he felt it incompatible
with his duty as a member of the H. of Commons to represent a body of
people without fulfilling _actively_ his engagements towards them; and
submitted to the will of Fox what he should do. (Ye D. of Bedford, who
was afterwards displeased with Tierney for his attendance, saying it
spoilt the effect of secession, affects ignorance of this proposal of
Tierney, but Fox himself, Fitzpatrick, and others, but especially the
first, say that Tierney behaved well, because he behaved frankly.)
Fox could not, and did not exact his renunciation of his seat, and
he remained near three sessions alone, unassisted, and unsupported,
Sheridan alone of the Foxites ever attending, and his attendance was as
much directed against Tierney as it was against Pitt.

[Sidenote: TIERNEY AND GREY]

This solitary opposition was of infinite use to T. as an orator and
as a public man; the daily use of his tongue taught him readily to
debate, and his diligence, ability, and plainness acquired him the
respect and confidence of the country. Successful as he was, he wanted
aid; he knew the aristocratical temper of the House was such that the
obscurity of his family would retard his progress, but that assisted
by Grey he could be high and well propped. Grey was a fit subject to
work upon; of an active, restless, unsatisfied temper, of boundless
ambition, he found himself a prey to melancholy in calm retirement.
Chance threw them together in the neighbourhood of Ham. Tierney did not
fail of encouraging his disposition to return, and strove to combat his
feelings of remorse about Fox, who had merely in compliance to Grey
and ye Duke of Bedford, adopted the measure of secession, a measure
notoriously against his own judgment.[170] In short, Grey resumed
his post in Parlt. Things went on smoothly, Grey made some capital
speeches, the divisions of Ministers fell off, but Opposition gained
nothing. Some of Fox’s old friends, the _staunch_ ones (such as Coke,
Ld. J. Townshend, and a few others), were offended at being written to
to attend, replying that no good could be done if Fox abstained from
coming, and that without his presence they would not attend. Grey,
always fickle, and generally desponding, grew soured; he saw Fox, and
at length persuaded him to come up upon his motion upon the State of
the Nation. Tierney, when he knew Fox was coming, expressed himself
strongly upon the absurdity of Grey’s going down to St. Anne’s to get
sense, and imprudently enough at the Friday Club declared his intention
of keeping away on the day of the debate, unless Fox gave a pledge of
his future attendance.

This was the conversation reported by Sheridan to Grey, and brought
forth a burst of rage and indignation from Grey against Tierney. The
expressions used on both sides were alarmingly strong. Upon T. saying
he should withdraw himself, if Fox was to come down occasionally and
Grey was not generally understood to be the leader, G. accused T. of
deceiving him by betraying him into attending by promises of support.
In short, the explanations and accusations were sharp and bitter on
both sides.

The King’s illness put a stop to the question; the motion was put off
from day to day, and Fox came, grew eager, and coalesced with Moira, as
has been mentioned elsewhere. The King’s recovery, like magic, drove
the whole set back to their hiding-places. Some fancied that Fox would
have continued in town but for Mrs. A. and the expense of a house; upon
which it was suggested to Ld. Hd. to hire one for him. This with his
usual alacrity to serve his uncle, he did without hesitation, announced
it to him by letter, and received the following reply.[171]

_April 28, 1801._--When Tierney heard of his determination against
coming, except to Tooke’s business, he told Grey peremptorily that he
should adhere to Ld. Moira and the neutrals. The assurance of attending
Horne Tooke’s question has not added to his popularity. In short, all
are offended with him.

           *       *       *       *       *

    [Sidenote: A FOOLISH PROTEST]

                                 _Holland House: April 30th, 1801._

Dissentient.

We deprecate and protest against this Measure because, as far as it
may be carried into execution, it tends to dissolve the allegiance
of the subject. A country over which Martial Law is exercised may be
crushed or subdued, but it is not governed, much less is it practical.
Allegiance is not more a duty on one side than protection on ye other;
the character of subjects and of enemies cannot exist together. A
military force can exercise nothing but the dominion of the sword. With
respect to the people there is no government. We, therefore, conceive
it to be our bounden duty, in our endeavours to preserve the Governt.
of the United Kingdom, not to lose sight of those advantages which
alone render it worth preserving.

                                                        THANET
                                                        ALBEMARLE
                                                        HOLLAND
                                                        KING.

This protest was entered against the Martial Law Bill for Ireland.
The composition is Francis’s, whose brevity and terseness make the
performance nonsense.[172] Mr. Pitt remarked that the sentence which
asserts the incompatibility of the character of subject and enemy is
the precise definition of a traitor.

This foolish Protest made a great deal of noise; Ld. Clare moved the
expunging it on account of its treasonable and seditious tendency,
which was opposed by 17 peers, some of very respectable characters.
I quarrelled with Francis, and would not make peace with him. His
explanation was worse than the original offence; he declared that he
disapproved of the sentiments, and feared the making them public would
get the protesters into a scrape. Then _why_ abet and assist what you
think mischievous and of bad consequence to your friends?

Ld. Wycombe returned about a fortnight since from Paris, and tho’ he
will not see _me_, he has entrusted his journal for my inspection.

‘Paris, which I had known under so many different circumstances, and
which I had originally known in times so very opposite to these. It
is an observation of Thucydides that, in the country of which he was
a native and of which he wrote, the traveller could not take a step
without treading on historic ground. With equal truth may it be said
that it is impossible to traverse Paris, without at each step being
reminded of occurrences which are destined to become the materials of
future history: occurrences which are the more striking, inasmuch as
they have not been received by us on the faith of tradition obscured
by the lapse of ages or gathered from the Annals of our ancestors, but
have taken place within our own memories, have involved the fall of
persons we ourselves have known, have overwhelmed institutions with
which we have been personally conversant, and have already materially
affected the destinies of the generation to which we belong.’

‘The most eloquent discourse cannot half so well illustrate the
character of human passion, the vicissitudes of human fortune, the
vanity of human pursuits, and the instability of human things, as the
aspect of this metropolis.’

[Sidenote: THE INFERNAL MACHINE]

‘When we were within a few steps of the _Théâtre de la République_ we
were surprised by an explosion resembling the report of a cannon.[173]
On stepping out of the carriage I perceived a column of smoke making
its way over the tops of the houses. In an instant the rattling of
cavalry announced the approach of the First Consul, who drove by us
with rapidity. We entered the theatre lost in conjecture as to the
probable cause of so strange and sinister an incident. We had but
little disposition to attend to the business of the drama, which was
presently put a stop to by the account of that heinous atrocity which
exhibits such a melancholy instance of the most deliberate depravity,
and which had so nearly terminated the transcendent career of that
illustrious man, whose fame will be more durable than the Pyramids
he has visited, whose life is consumed in a succession of dangers,
whose preservation should be dear not only to all good citizens, but
to all good men, whose fortunes may be deemed inseparable from the
fortunes of the Republic. The actor who came forward upon this occasion
made the audience acquainted neither with extent or particulars of
the misfortune which made it indecent to proceed. The theatre was
immediately evacuated; guards were seen moving in various directions,
and the measures of precaution were taken with a degree of calmness,
quickness, precision, and intelligence which served to give me some
idea of the perfection of the military system.

‘No one was able to tell what was the number of persons who had been
killed and wounded; but it was understood that the disaster had
originated in an attempt to destroy the First Consul in his way to
the Opera. At the portico of the Opera, I heard that the performance
was going on without interruption, and that Bonaparte, unmoved, was
partaking of the entertainment, which was an Oratorio,[174] as if
nothing unusual had happened. The next morning heard a few particulars;
some of the manner in which the Chief Consul had conducted himself. He
appears to have expressed a conviction that in his situation and at a
period like the present, such an occurrence was not to be considered as
being justly matter of surprise. He told those who had an opportunity
of seeing him that when, a short time before, his life had been
conspired against, he felt no particular solicitude in relation to the
punishment of a crime which seemed to have him only for its object; but
that now when the blow which was levelled at himself had fallen upon
others, when the safety of a part of the population of the capital had
been actually endangered, and when several individuals had become the
innocent victims of so great an atrocity, he should not hesitate to
demand a law authorising the immediate trial of those who might prove
implicated in its guilt. That as to what regarded himself personally,
he should die with as much glory at the head of the Legislature as
he could do at the head of one of the armies of the Republic. To the
Prefect of the Police[175] he expressed his dissatisfaction with
an asperity which sufficiently proved that he imputed a defect of
vigilance to that department.’...

[Sidenote: A REVIEW]

‘Went to the Review. In front of the Thuilleries were drawn up the
Grenadiers of the Consular Guard, who had followed Bonaparte to
Marengo, and had from their conduct in that memorable battle been
compared by Berthier to a redoubt of granite. On ye remaining sides of
the square were drawn up other troops. In the centre of the _place_
were stationed the officers of the _État Major_ on horseback, whose
uniforms and accoutrements were splendid to the greatest degree.
A beautiful cream-coloured Spanish horse, adorned with crimson
velvet, magnificently embroidered in gold, was held in readiness for
Bonaparte. A sudden burst of martial music, issuing from a profusion of
instruments, proclaimed his descent from the Palace. He wears no plume.
He is distinguished by the quietness of his deportment, the pensiveness
of his aspect, and by the paleness of his countenance, which thought
and watchfulness have worn. He was attended by his Mameluke. Mounted
on his docile charger, he galloped thro’ the ranks. The air resounded
with acclamations of applause, to which he seemed insensible. His
attention was confined to the troops. When he passed the colours he
saluted with a singular propriety of manner. After having rapidly
inspected the difft. corps, he rode to the centre of the ground, where
he prescribed the evolutions of the day, which took up very little
time. Nothing can exceed the precision and intelligence with which
the whole manœuvre is conducted. I particularly remarked the fine
appearance of the Pioneers, who, as well as the Grenadiers, seem to be
picked men. The flying Artillery is much to be admired, but the horses
of the Dragoons, altho’ active, were inferior in beauty to those which
are commonly purchased for the English Cavalry.’...

‘One of the party had been in the society of the First Consul, where
General Lannes was present, subsequent to the villainous attempt made
in the Rue Nicaise. B. observed that when the circumstance took place
he was a great way off in imagination, that the explosion had been
heard by him without reflection, and that he was first excited to
attend by Lannes, who was with him. General Lannes explained by saying
that he thought at the time, by the breaking of the glasses, that
musketry might be firing at them. ‘Lannes,’ said B., ‘you are not of
the Institute; if you were, you would have known that it was the air
contained within my carriage which broke the windows of it.’

On 16th May, 1801, I dined at Mrs. Sharp’s, in the City, on Irish Hill,
to meet Horne Tooke. He was ill, and in all probability would not
have kept his engagement, had he not been aware that the dinner was
expressly made to give me an opportunity of seeing him, and wise as he
is, he is not free from the frailty of the weak (and oftentimes of
the wise, as in this instance), in possessing a considerable portion
of vanity, for he was gratified at knowing he was sought as a _sight_.
He is an infirm, exhausted old man, with a mild, placid countenance,
a small penetrating eye, and a flat, broad forehead. His manners are
those of a remarkably high-bred, old-fashioned man of quality; his
sentences are precise, clear, and short. His language obsolete and
affectedly so, but often productive of a happy and singular effect,
witty and brief. He so evidently laboured under the pressure of bodily
pain that he only _flashed_, but from those scintillations I could
easily perceive what he must have been in his days of vigour, when
his mind, unfettered by physical infirmity, could give itself full
scope. His praises of Mr. Fox were extravagant. He said: ‘God Almighty
has made that man to show his omnipotence.’ He said to Ld. H.: ‘You
see, my Lord, how your uncle has kicked me in the dirt!’ The answer
was puzzling, as it was difficult to know to what he alluded, but he
explained by adding: ‘He makes me despise myself. He, whom I have
abused from the commencement of his political life, has been the first
and only person who stood manfully forth in my defence.’[176]

_17th Nov., 1801._--Indisposition and indolence have combined to
prevent my either writing, reading, or thinking for three several
months back--after our return from Worthing. We stayed here about
a month, during which period we went to Ld. King’s at Ockham, to
Roehampton, and dined at Chiswick, and at Dss. of Leinster’s at
Wimbledon. Went to Brighthelmstone, September 15th; stayed there
till October 21st. During that interval passed 6 days at Ld. Robert
Spencer’s at Woolbeding. I _called_ at Goodwood, D. of Richmond’s,
on our way back to Brighton; returned here October 22nd. Sleep
occasionally at a house we have taken in Albemarle Street for the
play-nights and the late nights in H. of Lords.

[Sidenote: MINISTERIAL NEGOTIATIONS]

Peace has been made. Pitt continues supporting Ministers; the
Grenvilles are in open opposition.[177] A negotiation has just broken
off between Grey and Ld. St. Vincent, the purport of which was to
bring in G., the Duke of Bedford, and Ld. Moira into the Cabinet. Grey
gave up Fox with a quibble; the others excluded Sheridan, Lauderdale,
and Lansdown; insisted upon maintaining Ld. Clare in Ireland, and Ld.
Hardwick. G. said, if he is kept, we must have a Ld.-Lt.; they would
not agree. Ld. Moira objected to D. of Portland; King could not be made
to give him up. The arrangement, when they came to terms, could not
take place. G. used the D. of B.’s name further than he was warranted,
I suspect. It is all over now; only Tierney remains with Addington.

Fox was given up shamefully. For if ever one man was bound to follow
the bad and good fortunes of another, it is surely Grey, whose vehement
and rash judgment drove the other out of the high post he occupied;
and yet he is the first to negotiate and give him up. Fie, fie, for
such patriots, when they are not true to their friends as private men.
However, Grey is perfectly honest, only violent and irresolute, and
easily swayed by sudden impressions. Pelham[178] is Secretary of State
for the Home Department: he is married to Lady Mary Osborne, the Duke
of Leeds’s sister, an amiable person, who will no doubt make him happy.

_H. House, 18th Nov., 1801._--General Fitzpatrick told us yesterday
of a curious circumstance about a copy of Gibbon’s works, which
belonged to Mr. Fox. As a marginal note Fox wrote in the beginning of
the book, ‘This gentleman, on such a day, told me that the country
could not be saved unless the heads of three or four of the Cabinet
Ministers were laid upon the table of the House of Commons. On such
a day, about a week after he delivered that opinion, he was made a
Lord of Trade by those very men.’ Topham Beauclerk, who was a _friend_
of Gibbon’s, offered him anything for the book, saying: ‘I must soon
die, and my books will be sold after my death by public auction, so
Gibbon’s shabbiness will be notorious and perpetuated.’ Some time
after, an execution was put into Mr. Fox’s house, and his goods were
seized, but, having been assigned over to Mr. Moore, their seizure was
resisted. There was, in consequence, a trial in the Court of King’s
Bench, and one of the opposite counsel handed up this very book to Ld.
Loughborough, to prove to him that Mr. Fox must have considered the
book as his own, and not as Mr. Moore’s, by the marginal notes, and
that if necessary they should be read in court. Ld. L., who was a more
cautious friend than Topham Beauclerk, gave the book back, saying it
was unnecessary to read them to the court. Ye General was a party to
the bond, and was in court himself when this passed.

           *       *       *       *       *

Some months, passed in anxiety and grief, have elapsed since I even
thought of this Journal. The winter had nearly proved fatal to
Charles. Illnesses and relapses succeeded each other so rapidly, that
his strength was almost exhausted, and in February we almost ceased
expecting that he could recover. He did, but to avoid the danger of a
return, we are to pass the ensuing winter in a warm climate.

[Sidenote: DUKE OF BEDFORD’S DEATH]

The death of the D. of Bedford followed. What did not that calamity
cost me! In him I lost the truest and best friend I possessed. His
society was amongst the greatest of my pleasures. I loved and respected
him, and was proud to see intimately the man on whom the eyes of the
public were turned with approbation and confidence. He died as he
had lived, an example to all who saw him. At the close of a medical
consultation about Charles, on ye 28th of Feb., Dr. Vaughan wished me
joy of the success of the operation which had been performed the eve.
before upon the D. of B. Frightened at this I asked an explanation,
and heard from Mr. Knight, the surgeon (who was here for Charles), the
nature of the disease.

           *       *       *       *       *

We left H. H. on the 8th of July (1802), with the following persons
belonging to us, ourselves, Charles, Henry Edward,[179] Mr. Allen, Mr.
Howard, and little Marsh, for Paris.

We had apartments taken for us some time before we came; they are very
spacious and convenient, the whole _rez-de-chaussée_ of the Hotel
Beauveau, Faubourg St. Honoré. The next day we went to Maret,[180]
the Minister, to see the parade. The Carrousel has been considerably
extended, and 15,000 troops can manœuvre in it. The explosion of the
infernal machine, by destroying some houses, rendered it more easy
to enlarge the court. The Brazen Horses from Venice are placed upon
the Grille which runs across the Carrousel; they stand separate, and
produce a very poor effect.[181]

Nothing can be more splendid than the uniforms of the officers, and
the housings of the horses. The Consul rides a fine white Arabian. He
is known amidst his officers by the plainness of his dress and unlaced
black hat. The corps of Mamelukes appeared for the first time; their
sudden and uncombined evolutions give a wildness to their appearance
that shows a little what they must be when attacking in reality. The
town was illuminated in the evening, and as carriages were prohibited
in the streets, we walked, and saw everything with the greatest ease
and facility. There were public dinners given by the Government to some
hundreds of the soldiers at each public garden.

When I first came, I saw much of Madame de Coigny, but latterly less;
she is inquisitive and talkative.

On the 15th of Fructidor, Mr. Fox was presented to Bonaparte, who
seems to have studied how to receive him in a distinguished manner. He
addressed him in a speech evidently got by heart and of course highly
complimentary. The purport was that he was the greatest man of one of
the greatest countries, and that his voice had always been exerted on
the side of humanity and justice, and that to its influence the world
owed the blessings of peace.

[Sidenote: ST. CLOUD]

On Saturday, the 21st August, 1802, we went with the General,[182]
Ld. Robert,[183] and Frederick,[184] and we took Charles to St.
Cloud. It was a palace belonging formerly to the Dukes of Orleans, but
poor Marie Antoinette liked it, and is accused of having exerted her
royal influence to compel the late Duke to sell it, which he did most
reluctantly. She was so partial to its beauties that she was profuse
in her expense to decorate it. In each taste the First Consul imitates
her, as he is so impatient to take possession that the surveyors are
obliged to make the men work all night; and he likes it so much that
no expense is spared to render it a fit residence for the Sovereign
of France. The gallery remains as it was finished by Gaston, Duke of
Orleans, Louis XIII’s brother; only on the panels some of the plunder
of Italy, which was in the Museum of the Louvre, has been placed,
much to their disadvantage, as the gaudy ceiling and rich gilding
kills the colouring of the pictures. They are capital; some of my old
acquaintances out of the Palais Pitti. The apartments that are fitted
up are done in _le goût sévère_, which, in other words, means a dark
and dingy style. The walls are hung with cloth, and draperies of cloth
edged with magnificent deep parti-coloured fringes are festooned over
it. The colours being generally dark green and brown produce a solemn
effect, and the whole has a sombre military appearance; the rods of the
curtains are finely polished spears. Where the Queen’s apartments have
been preserved, I admire them far beyond those in the _goût sévère_,
and prefer bright gilding to the heavy mahogany, and a well-stuffed
sofa to a small, hard one. In short, the exchange is a bad one, _les
ris et les amours_ please me, broad cloth and sphinxes do not. The
Library is very pretty, and the books placed in very appropriate cases,
plain and simple, but at the same time rich and decorated. The gardens
are insignificant, but if the Consul continues to like living there, I
doubt not he will find means to extend them, tho’ as yet I only look
upon St. Cloud as a halt on the road to Versailles.

On Sunday, ye next day, we went with a large party to Versailles,
where we expected to see the _Eaux_ play, but we had been misled. We
dined at _Le petit Trianon_, formerly a favourite little palace of the
Queen’s, with a garden _à l’Anglaise_; but what I did admire indeed
is _Le grand Trianon_, a most noble palace. The centre, instead of a
_corps-de-logis_, is a peristyle composed of a double row of large
marble columns; the front to the garden is very large and grand, only a
_rez-de-chaussée_. The garden is thoroughly in the French style, broad
and spacious walks, fountains, alleys, _cabinets de verdure_; in short,
just what a garden should be near a large house.

We went from thence to Versailles. What a change from former days! We
walked along the Terrace, and so to the _Orangerie_, where there are
trees in tubs as large as any I ever saw growing either at Nice or
Naples in the common ground. One old tree they call _François Premier_,
and they add that it is 400 years old. It is satisfactorily proved by
a _procès verbal_ that it belonged to the Constable of Bourbon, and
was confiscated with the rest of his property, and so came to François
I. Our party was numerous: Mr. and Mrs. Fox, Ld. Robert, the General,
Mr. Allen, Frederick Ponsonby, Miss Adair, Heathcote, St. John,
Trotter,[185] Smith (the Petrarch of Carolina’s brother), Green.

           *       *       *       *       *

The following is a list of those who dined with us at Paris in July,
August, and part of September, 1802.

[Sidenote: LA FAYETTE]

_La Fayette_, who is indebted to Bonaparte for his liberty, has, since
his return to his native country, resided chiefly upon the small
estate the Revolution has not deprived him of at La Grange. Bonaparte
affected to consult the nation whether he should be Consul for life;
was answered by La Fayette, who wrote a gentle but able remonstrance
upon the subject. Bonaparte was little enough, when an army promotion
took place, to pass over La Fayette’s son and nephew; he has, however,
promoted them since. His son was educated in Washington’s house,
appears very amiable; he was just married.[186]

_Andréossy_[187] is the son of an obscure man of Italian origin,
employed by Riquet in the Languedoc Canal. He was born at
Castelnaudary, educated at Sorèze, and served under the _ancien régime_
as an engineer. He made some campaigns in Italy, went to Egypt, was
there employed upon an expedition to ye Lake Menzalah, and returned
in the vessel which brought the First Consul to France. He has since
been named to ye Embassy of England. He lived very much with us. He
is a plain _Militaire_ in his manner, and if he offends it will be
unintentional, as he is disposed to maintain peace and amity between
the two countries.

_Caffarelli_,[188] brother of a general of the same name killed before
Acre. He is a fellow townsman and school companion of Andréossy, and
like him descended from an Italian family brought by Riquet to work
at the Canal. He is a remarkably displeasing person in his manner, a
sycophant and court echo of the ante-chamber of Bonaparte; from love
of order and morality always proclaiming that the First Consul and
his wife sleep in the same bed, and that the domestic virtues of a
warrior are more important than his heroic deeds. In short, from him
one collects the disgusting cant which is to be employed by the present
Governt. as a counterpoise to the wild extravagant opinions of atheism
and immorality set afloat under the first constitution of the Republic.

_Valence_,[189] a general who served in the first campaigns under
Dumouriez, a good-humoured, boasting, bluff Papa.

_Mde. de V._, daughter of Mde. de Sillery, a beauty on the wane,
pleasing and clever.

_Abbé St. Fard_, a son of the Duke of Orleans, father to the
unfortunate _Égalité_; remarkably obliging, and, tho’ not distinguished
for talents, very popular, and a person one cannot but like.

_Duc de Duras_,[190] a _ci-devant Duc_ returned, but not reconciled to
the changes in his country.

[Sidenote: LALLY TOLLENDAL]

_Lally Tollendal_,[191] the epitome of sentiment. By some inconceivable
freak imagined himself to be the son of Count Lally, executed for the
surrender of Pondicherry. Whilst at college he heard the story; his
birth was obscure and even mysterious. A flight into the region of
fancy made him imagine himself the son of the state culprit (but not
till after his execution); he then pleaded for him. He is returned
to France after an absence of many years, but, like many who were
distinguished at first, he returns but to see his insignificance and
the indifference of the Governt. to these, many of whom conceived
themselves to be of the utmost importance.

_Psse. d’Hesnin_ [_sic_], an excellent woman, formerly about the Queen,
attached for many years to Lally.

_Mde. Flahaut._[192] A volume would not suffice. An agreeable
adventuress, who after failing in various projects, both upon English
and French, at last has closed her tempestuous career by marrying
Souza, ye Portuguese Minister. She has written some pretty novels;
her conversation consists more in a narrative of the good things she
has said than in those she actually does say. Her son, a fine, open
young man. He is handsome and uncommonly engaging in his manners and
countenance.

_Girardin_,[193] an _élève_ of Jean Jacques, and proprietor of
Ermenonville. He was eager in the beginning of Revolution; emigrated
for a short time; is now a Tribune, and intimate friend of Joseph
Bonaparte’s. He is not an _Emile_, but good-natured. His love of
independence and the naked truth for the sake of truth will never
expose him to the straits a patriot must undergo. He will shift in time.

_Gallois_,[194] a Tribune, uncommonly interesting in his manner, with a
countenance that proclaims his talents and gentle, amiable heart.

_Abbé Morellet_,[195] an old _économiste_. Sprightly, altho’ he is
turned of eighty.

_Molé_,[196] a descendant of the great President of that name. We knew
him well in England; a mild, gentlemanlike young man, very unlike a
young Frenchman.

_Chevalier Acerbi_,[197] an Italian Cisalpine. He travelled to North
Cape, and has published two 4to. vols. of his journey; a clever man,
great facility of languages.

_Le Chevalier de la Bintinaye_, nephew of the _ci-devant_ Archbishop of
Bordeaux.

_Marquise de Coigny_, celebrated for her wit. Her daughter, a charming
girl.

[Sidenote: M. DE NARBONNE]

_Narbonne._[198] The scandalous chronicles of the old Court report
that he is the son of Mde. Adélaïde of France. He is strikingly like
the Bourbons, but depraved as were the manners, it is too repugnant to
nature to credit the whole story. His conversation is brilliant, full
of lively sallies, and, upon the whole, he is one of the most agreeable
persons in society I ever met with. He was Minister of War for a moment
just after the King accepted the Constitution. He is attached to Mde.
de Staël, who has the most uncontrolled dominion over his opinions
and conduct. His person is a more divided property. He used to be
Talleyrand’s intimate friend, but Mde. Grand, finding him averse to her
elevation, by degrees broke the friendship.

_Ségur_,[199] son of the Comte, a promising, rising young man, married
to Mde. d’Aguesseau’s daughter.

_Young Ségur_, a flippant lad, vain of having made under McDonald
a campaign, which he has written, and of having gone, by order of
Bonaparte, with more celerity than was ever done, from Paris to Madrid
and back again. Age and some well-directed rebuffs will be of infinite
service to him.

_Mde. d’Aguesseau._

_Jaucourt_,[200] a Tribune. Under the days of the Court he was
distinguished for his _galanterie_ and _dévouement_ in affairs of
intrigue. There is a famous anecdote of his losing his thumb not to
betray a lady whose house he quitted by stealth at daybreak. The Swiss
heard a noise at the gate, and shut it with violence; Jaucourt’s thumb
was crushed, but he made no noise, and for many years the adventure
was secret. He is now married, according to the licence allowed by the
Revolution, to Mde. de la Châtre. He is an agreeable man, she is clever.

_Abbé Casti._[201] I will not do to him what an injudicious panegyrist
has done to Ariosto, whose epitaph is laden with an enumeration of his
works. Suffice it to say that his last work is inferior to all his
others--_Gli animali parlanti_, a poem as dull and as ill-conceived
as Dryden’s _Hind and Panther_. _Those_ discuss polemical questions,
and Casti’s reason upon the abstract principles of Governt. He is very
old, and worn out by every species of debauchery and excess; his eyes
twinkle at times, and show a trace of his former life, but they are but
rare scintillations.

_Rumford_, ye Yankee philanthropist. I have often named him elsewhere.

[Sidenote: M. LE CHEVALIER]

_Le Chevalier_,[202] a most cordial, warm-hearted, zealous man.
He travelled to the plain of Troy with Sir Francis Burdett, and
has written upon it, which has given rise to a fresh controversy.
He is employed _au Bureau des relations extérieures_, merely from
Talleyrand’s friendship for him. His language is not calculated to
obtain him promotion in his career, nor is he trusted with anything,
his place being a sinecure and more a pension than an employment.

_Monteron_,[203] [_sic_] one of the unfortunate Duke of Orléans’ set, a
complete _mauvais sujet_, but an agreeable _vaurien_. He was one of the
Dsse. de Fleury’s husbands, but has regained his liberty.

_Markoff_,[204] the Russian Ambassador, a _rusé_ diplomat, scurvily
treated by Bonaparte, who seems to make a point of saying offensive
things before him.

_M. de Grave_,[205] an obliging driveller.

_Abbé Dillon_, brother of the Beau Dillon,[206] &c. Knew him in Paris
in 1790, afterwards in Italy and England. A conceited _bel esprit_,
with too much pretensions.

_Calonne._ One may say of him as Johnson did of Garrick, that his
loss has removed a stock of harmless amusement from society. He was
delightful; with all the freshness and vivacity of youth, he had the
taste and refinement of riper years. Tho’ he allowed himself to range
in the regions of fancy, when he ought to have been restrained by the
strictness of veracity, yet he did it with such liveliness and wit that
one compounded for the lost fact in hearing the facetious story. He was
_murdered_ by an unskilful physician a very short time after we quitted
Paris.

_Talma_,[207] the celebrated tragedian. His voice is bad, nor is
his conception of his part always correct. He is the person who has
introduced the severity and perfection of costume in the theatre. He is
not clever and not well informed.

_Abbé Sicard_,[208] the successor of Abbé de L’Épée. He brought with
him his most intelligent pupil _Massieu_. The pains he bestows upon the
unhappy objects confided to his care entitle him to much praise; the
lectures are worth seeing once, but to those who stand not in need of
this assistance are soon tedious.

_Bertrand._[209] I knew him in Italy. He is a friend of Mde.
d’Albany’s, and belongs to the society of Mde. de Souza, Morellet, &c.,
&c. He is declining fast; he was a lively man.

_Charles de Noailles_,[210] an uncommonly handsome man, son of the
Prince de Poix. He lived very much in England, and at one time with the
Prince, who grew jealous at Mrs. Fitzherbert’s partiality to him, which
occasioned their rupture. He has much more sense and useful knowledge
than one might suppose from a slight acquaintance with him he possessed.

[Sidenote: ENGLISH IN PARIS]

The English who dined with us were Mr. and Mrs. Fox, Ld. Robert Adair,
St. John, Mr. Trotter, Mr. Clarke, Green, Heathcote, Kemble, Pinkerton,
Fitzpatrick, 2 Erskines, Mr. Merry, Lens, Abbé Roberts, Banks, Mrs. H.
Fox, Mr. Neave, Miss Townshend, Mr. Parish, St. Leger, Tuyle, Warner,
Francis, A. St. Leger, Capt. Jones, Jerningham. We dined twice at
Sieyès; once at Cambacères’s and Lucchesini’s; often at Talleyrand’s;
once at Versailles with the Caumonts and Andréossys.

The Hollands left Paris on September 20, 1802, for a tour in the South
of France and Spain. They did not return to England till April 1805.
The Journal continues until April 8, but is omitted from these pages.

_July 24th, 1806._--The Russians have made a separate peace.[211] The
Cabinet have determined upon sending a person upon an extraordinary
Mission to Portugal, and have chosen Lauderdale for that purpose, and
he has accepted. Ld. St. Vincent is to follow with the fleet, and be
joined in the Commission; the nature of the appointment to be the same
as Ld. Minto and Ld. Hood were at Toulon. It is proposed, if Portugal
be invaded, that we should carry off (_vi et armis_) the Royal family,
and such as choose to follow their fortunes, and establish them at
_Brésil_. A French army of 90,000 men is assembled at Bayonne for the
invasion of Portugal. Eugène Beauharnais, the Viceroy of Italy, is to
have the command of it; the attack is to be made by Galicia.

[Sidenote: NEGOTIATIONS FOR PEACE]

_25th._--The preliminaries of peace between France and Russia have
been signed by d’Oubril, though he knew at the time that Basilico
was on his road to Paris with dispatches from our Governt. He signed
three hours after he knew of his landing at Boulogne. The following
stipulations form the basis of the peace. The Russians are to return
Corfu, but they are not to keep more than 4000 men in garrison there.
Dalmatia and Ragusa are left to the French. The Montenegrins are not
to be punished for the successful resistance which, in conjunction
with the Russians, they have opposed to the French arms, but this
amnesty does not extend to any offences which they may have committed
against their lawful Sovereign. Sicily is left exposed to the French
without a stipulation in its favour. No provision of any sort is made
for the ex-King of Naples, nor is there any allusion to him in the
Treaty, except a declaration on the part of the French that they have
no objection to the King of Sicily _et sa femme_ (they will not call
her Queen) finding an asylum wherever they can. By a secret article,
Minorca, Majorca, and Iviza are to be transferred from Spain to the D.
of Calabria, on condition that the ports of these islands shall be shut
against the English. The Russians agree to exclude the English from
all their ports in the Mediterranean. The French are to be allowed six
months[212] to evacuate Germany. The present Treaty must be ratified
within twenty-five days.

On the day following this extraordinary transaction, Ld. Yarmouth[213]
presented his credentials to the F. Governt., though his instructions
were not to present them at all, till the basis of the pacification was
settled. This step of Ld. Y.’s is very reprehensible, as it may give
d’Oubril a pretext to justify his conduct.

[Sidenote: NEGOTIATIONS FOR PEACE]

The terms of peace originally offered by Talleyrand and conveyed to
Mr. Fox by Ld. Y. were very advantageous to this country; indeed, so
extremely so, that as the proposals were verbally made, much doubt
was entertained of Ld. Y.’s accuracy in reporting them, and he owed
entirely his being employed in the negotiation to the doubts of his
veracity. The _uti possidetis_ on both sides was to be the basis of the
treaty. Hanover was to be restored to the K. of E., in return for our
acknowledgment of Bonaparte’s newly-created Kings. No further changes
were to be made in Germany or Switzerland. The integrity of Spain
and Portugal was to be guaranteed in both Hemispheres. We were not
to interfere with the settlement of Italy or Holland. Upon a distant
hint being thrown out about commercial arrangements, ‘Nous voulons
être maîtres chez nous’ was the reply. When Sicily was mentioned,
_Talleyrand_, who had spoken the above, exclaimed, ‘Mais que voulez
vous? Vous l’avez.’ Our Cabinet readily assented to these terms (in
addition to which it was hinted that Bonaparte was disposed to concur
with Mr. F. in taking measures for the general abolition of the Slave
Trade, but this was intended as a sneer. When Talleyrand read the
resolutions of the H. of Commons upon the subject of the S. Trade, he
said there was another Act of Parliament much more necessary, one for
which the Spaniards, Portuguese, and Germans called out most loudly,
‘_Et cette acte du Parlement, c’est la paix_’), and Ld. Y. was sent
back to Paris with full assent to his message. But when he arrived
there he found the views of the French Governt. materially changed in
the most important point. They now demanded that Sicily should be ceded
to them in order to be re-annexed to the kingdom of Naples. Joseph,
the new King, had represented that his kingdom of Naples would not be
secure without the possession of Sicily, and the French engineers had
given in a report that Sicily could be subdued with much more ease
than they had at first supposed. On these grounds, which the French
have the assurance to represent as _new occurrences_ since their first
overtures to Ld. Y., they pretend to justify their deviation from their
original proposals, and they offered to the King of Sicily, in exchange
for that island, to make him King of Dalmatia and Albania.[214]
D’Oubril, the Russian negotiator, who was by this time at Paris, and
who had been privy to everything done by our Cabinet, was caught by
this last proposal, and expressed his opinion decidedly in favour
of it. In the cession of Dalmatia to the King of Sicily, he fancied
that he saw the elevation of power which would remove the French to a
greater distance from the frontiers of Turkey, and prove in future a
bulwark against the extension of their empire in that quarter. He was
ready, as Mr. Fox observed, to sacrifice a well-understood English
object to an ill-defined Russian one. This modification of the original
project was received here with great disappointment and ill-humour,
and was considered as a breach of faith on the part of the French. We
contended that no event had happened which could justify any departure
from the first proposals. We could not consent to transfer Albania from
its present possessors, who were the friends and allies of England,
in order to make compensation to the K. of Sicily for the loss of his
dominions, which it was equally our interest and our duty to defend.
Dalmatia alone was not to be mentioned as an equivalent for Sicily.
But to show our disposition to accommodate matters, it was at length
proposed as a compromise, that Dalmatia should be given to the King of
Sardinia, with the title of King; and since the new K. of Naples was
desirous to have a greater extent of sea-coast, that Sardinia, together
with the other Spanish Islands of Majorca, &c., should be added to his
kingdom; Sicily on no account could we yield. The Minute which Mr. Fox
drew up for the Cabinet, in which he states his reasons compressed into
8 or 10 sentences, is the most able summary ever penned.

In this state of the negotiation, d’Oubril, who a few days before had
reminded Mr. Fox of the expression of ‘_piano piano_,’ which he had
used in his letter to Czartorisky upon the Grand Confederacy forming
last year, signed the peace, the outline of which I have just noted.
His excuse for this conduct is said to be the danger to which Russia
would be exposed, if they were to persuade Turkey and compel Austria
to join in a coalition against her. Austria is so much reduced that
she must comply with whatever France demands, and French influence
domineers at Constantinople. But these are not supposed to be the true
reasons for his conduct. The late changes in the private councils of
St. Petersburg are suspected to have had a greater share in determining
him, and it is even said that, on the strength of those, he has
ventured to take this important step without instructions from his
Court. He says, ‘He is gone back to lay his Treaty and head at the feet
of his Master.’

Czartorisky,[215] the late Minister of Russia, is a Pole of great
consideration and high rank in Poland. He owed his elevation to the
partiality of the Empress, who was passionately in love with him. He
afterwards became a favourite with Alexander; he played the truant to
his mistress, who was for a length of time quite inconsolable at his
infidelities. The Empress is with child at present.

[Sidenote: MISSION TO PORTUGAL]

_26th._--It is determined to send a military man to Portugal, and Ld.
Rosslyn[216] has been fixed upon for the mission. Ld. H. immediately
proposed to him to take Brougham, if he had any person in a civil
capacity. He promised to propose him to Ld. Grenville. There is an idea
of employing Dumouriez.

Sr. Sidney Smith has taken the Isle of Capri, and the French have
been worsted in several encounters in Calabria. Hopes are entertained
that we shall be able to defend Sicily against the French, with the
aid alone of the Sicilians. The Queen and Duke of Calabria, who are
surrounded by persons suspected of being secretly in the French
interest, are eager for carrying the war into Calabria.

Great dissatisfaction at Ld. Yarmouth’s conduct, and another negotiator
must go. Ld. Holland not being able to leave his uncle, Lauderdale,
as the next best person, is to go. It is a sad mortification, as it
has long been the darling hope of uncle and nephew; but it would be
impossible to go, as Ld. H., besides being useful, is also one of the
greatest comforts to Mr. Fox. Mr. F. so ill that none of the last
transactions of the preceding three days have been communicated to him.

_27th July._--Mr. Fox stronger, and in better spirits to-day, but there
is no material change in his complaint. The news of the Russian Treaty,
and the determination of sending Lauderdale to Paris, were communicated
to him by Ld. Howick. Upon hearing that L. was to go to Paris, he
exclaimed, ‘Why does not Holland go?’ Ld. Howick was perplexed, and
stammered by way of excuse the ‘suddenness of the departure’; upon
which Fox said, ‘Oh, I understand you!’ and immediately changed the
subject. When he saw Ld. Holland about an hour afterwards, he began
with saying, ‘So, young one, you won’t go to Paris’; on Ld. Holland’s
answering that he preferred staying, as he thought he was a comfort to
him, he caught his hand and said, with great emotion, ‘Yes, a comfort
indeed,’ and was for several minutes quite overcome and shedding
tears. This circumstance is the first event which has given him any
apprehension about his own danger.

[Sidenote: LORD YARMOUTH’S CONDUCT]

D’Oubril has written to Stroganoff[217] that he signed the
preliminaries with Ld. Yarmouth’s approbation. Ld. Yarmouth in his
dispatches says quite the contrary. Copies of the letters have been
sent to St. Petersburg. Our Ministers are greatly displeased with
Ld. Yarmouth for having presented his credentials the very day after
d’Oubril signed, and are not without fear that he may be bullied or won
into signing the preliminaries without further instructions. There are
some unpleasant suspicions afloat about Ld. Y., especially upon the
score of stock-jobbing.[218] General Clarke[219] is the person named
to negotiate with him; he was employed upon d’Oubril’s business. The
French already show a disposition since the signature of the Russian
Treaty, to rise in their demands. They have thrown out hints that
they expect _St. Lucia_ and _Tobago_ to be restored to them, and Ld.
Y. has of his own head suggested that _Cuba_ should be ceded to the
King of Naples, who cannot be reduced to live as a fugitive or subject
in the dominions of his son. Ld. Y. is suspected of concealments in
his report of his negotiations. A messenger went off instructing him
not to proceed in any way, but wait L.’s arrival. Notwithstanding
their displeasure, Ld. Y. has been joined in the Commission with Ld.
Lauderdale.

_28th._--Mr. Fox nearly in the same state; his spirits are good, and
he has still great hopes of recovery. He said this morning, ‘I hope
my recovery is not so desperate as peace.’ The news from Paris is
every day less favourable, so much that hints have been thrown out to
Ld. Yarmouth about the restitution of Pondicheri and Surinam, and the
other Dutch colonies in S. America, about the expulsion of the French
Princes from England, and a restraint upon the licence of the journals.
Ministers are much more discontented with Ld. Y. L. has been told in
the most explicit manner by the Cabinet, that if he finds anything in
Ld. Y.’s conduct to disapprove of, he has only to give a hint, and he
shall be recalled.

Bonaparte is elated beyond his usual tone of insolence since he
procured the Russian Treaty; he sent for the Austrian Chargé
d’Affaires, and ordered him to signify to his master that he must lay
aside the title of Emperor of Germany, and yield the precedence to
France, and that he must assent to and recommend the alterations in the
constitution of the Empire, which were proposed to be held at Frankfort
on the 10th August. The Chargé d’Affaires pleaded that he durst not
convey such a message to his Sovereign. ‘_Pourquoi votre maître ne
m’envoye-t’-il pas un ambassadeur, et pas un misérable parlementaire?_’

_29th._--Professor Dugald Stewart, who has just arrived from Edinburgh,
is to go with L. to Paris. Gaeta is taken, and Sr. Sidney has met with
some check in the kingdom of Naples.[220] L. had a conversation alone
with Mr. F., in which he opened himself freely. He said he wished to
retire from office till he got better, and to have Ld. H., whom he had
always destined ultimately to succeed him, appointed to fill his place
_pro tempore_, adding that he had been thinking of this for some time,
but that he had put it off in the hope of being able to sign the peace
before he retired. He bid L. ‘open the matter to Ld. Grenville,’ and
added that he ‘would talk further on the subject to Ld. Grenville in
8 or 10 days.’ In a conversation which L. had with Ld. Grenville some
time ago, during which they talked of Mr. Fox’s situation and of the
small prospect of any amendment in his health, Ld. Grenville said,
‘That he hoped his own conduct had been such as to satisfy Mr. Fox’s
friends since the period of their being connected together, and if that
disastrous calamity should happen, and most disastrous indeed would
it be for the country, he trusted, they would have no reason to be
dissatisfied with any future arrangements that might take place.’

Sheridan, who dined here to-day, begged to talk to me privately. He
said that it was the wish of many of Fox’s friends, whenever the state
of his health should make it impossible for him to attend to the duties
of his office, that Ld. H. should be appointed his successor; that such
an appointment would be regarded by them as a pledge that the Whig
Party was still to be kept up, and its principles maintained; that the
Prince was very eager to have them carried into effect; that he had
spoken to Windham, who seemed to listen with satisfaction. That he,
‘from delicacy, spoke to me instead of to Ld. H., and begged I would
communicate the substance of them to him,’ He told me that George
Byng and the second-rate sort of politicians were very eager upon the
subject.

Cline, the surgeon, has seen Mr. Fox, and declares himself ready to
perform the operation whenever the physicians shall judge it expedient,
as he does not see any reason to think the result more formidable to
Mr. F. than to any other person.

[Sidenote: A SUCCESSOR TO FOX]

Ld. Howick is full of plans for an Administration, in the event of
Mr. Fox’s retirement, or worse. He takes for granted that neither the
General or Ld. Fitzwilliam would choose to remain in office if F. were
away. He would, in that case, make Whitbread Secretary at War, himself
S. for the Home Department, Tom Grenville the Admiralty, Tierney the
Board of Control, Ld. H., of course, the Foreign Office; and, said I,
‘Pray where do you put Lauderdale, ye first, greatest, and best lord?’

_31st._--Lauderdale had an interview with Ld. Grenville, and repeated
the substance of his late conversation with Mr. F.; Ld. G. listened
with great attention, but made no reply. Just as L. went out, he called
him back to beg that he would say to Ld. H. that, ‘He had many times
abstained from going to Stable Yard, from an apprehension that if
Mr. Fox should know he was there, he might suppose he was come upon
business and make an effort to see him, which might do him harm; but
that if he followed the dictates of his own inclination, he should be
there every day,’ Tierney and Ld. Morpeth have both expressed to me
very strongly their wishes and the necessity that Ld. H. should be the
_locum tenens_ for his uncle.

_1st August._--Ld. Rosslyn has written a letter on the subject of
his Mission to Portugal, from which it appears he is not inclined to
undertake the services assigned to him. When Admiral Markham read it,
he observed upon it that, ‘Ld. St. Vincent, when he sees this, will say
the fellow has got dung at his heart.’ Not a very elegant or delicate
mode of expression!

It is said that Spain is disposed to a war with France, in consequence
of their having discovered that a plan of partitioning Spain is in
agitation, by which Estremadura and Galicia are to be annexed to
Portugal, and made into a kingdom for the Prince of the Peace,[221]
while the rest of Spain is to be given to one of B.’s brothers.

Mr. Goddard (Ld. Henry Spencer’s friend) arrived this evening from
Paris with passports for Lauderdale. When the passport was required,
Bonaparte exclaimed, ‘What! another passport! Have they not a blank one
already? But this is of a piece with the whole of their conduct during
the negotiation; delay, delay is their object.’ ‘But will you grant
them the passport?’ ‘Yes, and for twenty more if they choose.’

_2nd._--Lauderdale set off for Paris this evening, with Professor
Stewart, and Mr. Maddison from the Post Office. Ld. H. gave him a
letter to Serra and Prince Masserano.[222]

Mr. Fox better; Vaughan said this morning that there was a greater
assemblage of favourable symptoms than there had been any day since he
attended.

[Sidenote: SHERIDAN’S INTRIGUES]

Sheridan came here in the evening, and talked over his schemes. He
enlarged greatly upon the state in which the House of Commons would be
left if Mr. Fox were removed from it; deplored the unpopularity of Ld.
Howick, and seemed to insinuate that Petty had been tried and found
unfit for the task.[223] He has some project, all founded upon his
enmity to Ld. Howick and hereditary suspicion of Ld. Henry, to try and
rouse Ld. H.’s old partiality for Canning, and get him and Perceval
into the Administration.

_3rd._--Mr. Fox not quite so well.

_4th._--Mr. Fox in high spirits, and talks confidently of meeting
Parlt. in October; approves of an early session in time of war. He
has not the slightest expectation of peace, and expects Lauderdale’s
immediate return.

_5th._--When Bonaparte was told that L. was coming, he said, ‘Comment!
on m’envoye un ancien Jacobin.’ D’Oubril had been shut up for 14
hours with General Clarke, before he signed the Preliminaries. It is
a dexterous way of carrying a point, to weary out a man’s physical
strength, to tame him like a wild beast, to carry your purpose. The
pretext was to carry the business through rapidly.

Ali Pacha[224] of Janina has sent a letter which he received from
Bonaparte, all written in his own hand, inviting him to form a
connection with France. Ali observed he had never received such a mark
of respect and confidence from the English. Bonaparte is steady and
indefatigable in all his undertakings.

_6th._--Ld. Grenville has proposed to Ld. H. that he should be one
of the Commissioners for settling the points in dispute between this
country and the U. States of America.[225] Ld. Auckland, as President
of the Board of Trade, is to be the other Commissioner. The Americans
are Messrs. Monroe[226] and Pinckney.[227] Ld. Howick and others
consider this as a delicate opening on the part of Ld. G. to show his
readiness to comply with the intimation he had recently had from Mr. F.
through Lauderdale.

The operation is to be to-morrow.

_7th._--The operation was performed this morn.; Cline and Hawkins did
it. Sixteen quarts of amber-coloured water was drawn off; he bore
the operation perfectly well, his pulse very little affected, and no
disposition to faintness.

_8th._--Not so well from nausea and lowness.

Ld. H. has accepted the appointment of Commissioner. Mr. Eden is
the Secretary (by a shabby artifice of his father’s), Mr. Allen the
Assistant-Secretary.

It has been proposed to Tierney to go to Lisbon in the capacity in
which Ld. Rosslyn was to have gone. T.’s intimacy with Ld. St. Vincent
made him be thought of for the service. Ld. St. V. is to follow with
a squadron for carrying off, if necessary, the Portuguese fleet to
the Azores, and for transporting the Prince Regent and his friends to
Brazil. T. is disinclined, and has refused.

[Sidenote: LAUDERDALE’S MISSION]

_9th._--Ld. Grenville sent for Ld. Rosslyn late last night and renewed
his former proposal of sending him to Lisbon. Ld. R. has accepted, and
is to set off to-night. The Commissioners are Lds. Rosslyn, St. V., and
General Simcoe;[228] and, to my great satisfaction, Mr. Brougham.

_10th._--Mr. Fox continues very low; a great flow from ye wound, the
_anasarca_ diminishes fast.

_12th._--No messenger from Paris. It is suspected that some artifice is
used to delay the messengers, in order to prolong the negotiation, it
being a matter of importance to France to keep up the appearance of a
negotiation with England till the changes she meditates in Germany are
completed.

[Sidenote: NEGOTIATIONS FOR PEACE]

_14th._--Messengers in. Immediately on L.’s arrival he presented to the
F. Governt. a short recapitulation of what had already passed during
the negotiation, recalling to their recollection that the principle on
which the E. Governt. had consented to treat was the _uti possidetis_,
and reminding them how much this had been forgotten and departed from
in their late demands, and concluding with the alternative, either to
resume the uti possidetis as the principle of the Treaty, or to send
him passports to return to England.[229] Three days elapsed before
any answer was given to this note. General Clarke proposed that the
business should be carried on by conversations, and not by written
notes, which was refused. He also cavilled at some expressions in
L.’s note, but at length presented a note couched in rather a high
tone, complaining that when the Treaty was far advanced, and that Ld.
Yarmouth was on the point of signing, L. should have been sent over
to make inadmissible pretensions and to disappoint the hopes which
all Europe had conceived of peace. The _uti possidetis_ could not be
the basis of the Treaty, unless the Emperor were to be replaced in
the possession of Fiume, Treviso, and of all the conquests which he
had renounced by the Peace of Presburg. Upon this L. sent for his
passports. Three days were employed in sending from one office to
another to obtain them, without success. _M. de Lima_ (the Portuguese)
called upon him, and implored in the most earnest manner that he would
not break off the negotiation, as this would leave Portugal and Spain
exposed to certain and immediate destruction. No effect being produced
by this manœuvre, and L. persisting in his demand of passports, a 2nd
note was sent, expressed in much more civil and moderate language, and
tho’ _denying_ that the _uti possidetis_ had ever been admitted as the
basis of the Treaty, and declaring that without great modifications it
was inadmissible, but concluding with these words, ‘Mais l’Empereur
l’adopte puisqu’il le trouve.’ It is remarkable that in this note
the word _adopte_ was substituted in the Emperor’s own handwriting,
in place of _accepte_ or _admet_. And in the date, the 11th had been
inserted instead of the 7th, which had been the original date, so
that the note had been detained some days, in hopes of Lauderdale’s
yielding. On receiving this, L. addressed a note to the French
Governt., in which, without taking any notice of the contents of
theirs, he declared he could not go on with the negotiation, unless
he had an explicit assurance from them that he should have passports
at any time within half an hour, for himself or couriers, whenever he
should chance to demand them. This note produced a very civil answer
from Talleyrand, ascribing to accident entirely the blame of the
former delay, and assuring him that it was in no respect owing to any
want of civility to him. Lauderdale returned a second note, in answer
to the former one, that he could not negotiate further, unless the _uti
possidetis_[230] was distinctly admitted to be the basis of the Treaty,
and that every deviation from it should be considered as an exception
from the general basis of the peace. Things were in this state when
Basilico was sent away.

Ministers, especially Ld. Grenville, are extremely pleased with L.’s
conduct, particularly in his note on the subject of passports, after
he received the second note from General Clarke. A Council was held
immediately, in which it was determined to recall Ld. Yarmouth, and
Basilico was sent back in the evening with an order to that effect. The
reason for this measure:--1st, d’Oubril’s account and Ld. Yarmouth’s
of the conclusion of the Russian Treaty are in flat contradiction.
D’Oubril has written to Stroganoff that he signed the article with Ld.
Yarmouth’s knowledge and approbation. 2ndly, Ld. Yarmouth seems to
have spent some weeks at Talleyrand’s country house last autumn, tho’
he gave Ministry to understand that he was hardly acquainted with him.
3rdly, Ly. Yarmouth is very much connected with Monteron,[231] an agent
of Talleyrand’s, and employed in his office.

Favourable accounts of the disposition of the new Russian Governt.
towards this country; Stroganoff has received letters to that effect
from the new Prime Minister, _Budberg_,[232] in which he expresses
very strongly Alexander’s high opinion as well as his confidence
in Mr. Fox. Stroganoff thinks Russia will _not_ ratify d’Oubril’s
preliminaries.

Ld. Granville Leveson arrived this day from Petersburg, dined here,
and is looking handsomer than ever. I have not seen him these four
years.[233]

American Commissioners very amicable; disposed to settle the
differences, and to conclude a Treaty of Commerce between the two
countries.

_20th._--Ld. Howick dissatisfied with Sr. J. Borlase Warren, who lost
three days after he got orders to sail, and wasted three more at
Madeira, instead of going straight to ye W. Indies, by which Jerome
may escape.[234] Alderman Prinsep did not know how to open the Stock
Exchange.

Alas! Mr. Fox begins to fill again; they talk of another operation in
three weeks.

Lauderdale is abused at Paris, and represented as having deserted Fox.
Goldsmid is supposed to be Ld. Yarmouth’s agent in the Stock Exchange,
and to have transacted business for him to a great amount. Narbonne was
admonished not to visit L. so frequently, Fouché sent for him to that
purpose. Emperor gone to hunt, his Ministers rejoice at his absence
whilst in so violent a mood; they call him _bête féroce_.

[Sidenote: FOX’S HEALTH]

Second operation performed on Sunday. Bore the operation extremely
well; less water taken from him than on the former occasion, but he
was more completely emptied. Some pints of water which had remained
in ye abdomen were drawn off; fell soon after into a state of languor
and depression, but the physicians flattered themselves he had gained
strength in the interval between the operations, and that he would soon
be able to bear the course of medicines which they judged necessary
for his recovery, and in this hope they remained until Monday, the
7th September. Water had, in this interval, flowed repeatedly from
the wound in the abdomen, and the quantity of urine discharged had
augmented. They said there was a greater assemblage of favourable
symptoms than had appeared since they had been called in.

Sunday, ye 6th September, Vaughan thought that he felt some hardness
in the region of the liver, which made him speak much more doubtingly
to Ld. H. about Mr. Fox’s recovery than he had done the day before.
On Monday as he was led about the rooms at Chiswick[235] to look at
the pictures, a _gush_ of water burst from the wound, which had been
closed for some hours; he fell into a state of alarming weakness, and
continued so the whole of that and the succeeding day. A catch in his
breathing. We were sent for, and reached Chiswick by two, and found
him in this deplorable state. He was low, and never spoke willingly,
but every now and then got up in consequence of some irritation in his
bowels. He swallowed nothing but brandy, usquebaugh, and other strong
cordials; his senses and understanding never left him, tho’ he spoke
very little till Wednesday, when he reminded Ld. H. of a promise made
to him in Stable Yard, of telling him when he was in danger. It was a
painful duty, but he fulfilled it, and told him what the physicians
thought. He thanked him with his usual tenderness.

On Wednesday, about 4, he began to revive, and during the night, whilst
Ld. H. was sitting up with him, carried on a conversation in French,
that his servant, who was present, might not understand it, as it
regarded Mrs. Fox, &c. He had a few hours rest, and continued to get
better. In the course of the morning he was wheeled into an adjoining
room, and put on his spectacles to look at a caricature which Ld. L.
had sent from Paris. I went into the room, kissed his hand, and he
spoke kindly to me. During this amendment, he told Ld. H. he had never
been in such danger as the physicians had apprehended. He had said on
Tuesday night to Vaughan, ‘I have had a sad struggle for it, do you
think it will do?’

[Sidenote: FOX’S DEATH]

On Friday morning he became languid without any apparent cause, and
continued afterwards to sink without any interruption. His senses were
good, but he used the wrong word to express his meaning, and seemed
hurt that he could not find the right one. On Saturday death was fast
approaching; his pulse became every moment feebler, but still regular,
his breathing was deep, his strength gradually failing. Mrs. Fox sat
upon the bed, holding his hand; he looked upon her with that sweet
smile so expressive of all the benevolence and goodness of his heart.
He articulated distinctly, ‘I die happy’; his last words were, ‘Bless
you, I pity you.’ He died without a struggle or groan at ¼ before 6
o’clock, on Saturday, the 13th September, 1806.

The scene of unaffected grief was awful; every room contained a friend
who shed unfeigned bitter tears. Ld. Fitzwilliam was so overcome that,
for some time, it was feared he would follow the fate of his beloved
friend. Ld. Holland and General Fitzpatrick immediately went to Mrs.
Fox. A sad scene ensued. She wished the whole family should remain
as long as the body continued at Chiswick; accordingly ourselves and
the General continued until -- September. His body was examined by
Mr. Cline. Ld. Howick was at Chiswick, and sent off a messenger to
Windsor. The first account of Mr. Fox’s danger was communicated to
Ld. Grenville by Petty, on Monday night, the 8th Sept., and he was
very much affected on receiving the intelligence, which was quite
unexpected. When informed of his death by Ld. Howick, he inquired what
was proposed for his funeral, and when told that Ld. Holland had given
orders that he should be buried in the family vault at Foxley,[236] he
expressed his disappointment, and asked Ld. Howick what he thought fit.
Finding they were of the same opinion, he offered to recommend to the
King that a public funeral should be ordered. However, the private and
political friends thought it more consistent with the simplicity and
dignity of his character that he should be attended to the grave by
his friends, public and private, without the interference of Governt.,
and an application signed by many of the friends was addressed to Lord
H., begging that he might be interred in W. Abbey, and attended by his
friends.[237]

The answer of the King to Ld. Howick’s notification of Mr. Fox’s death
was in the coldest possible style, and did not express even sorrow for
the event. When Ld. Grenville told him that he had given the Seals
to Ld. Spencer, he approved of it, and added that there was no hurry
about disposing of them, and recommended Ld. Grenville to take his time
(considered as an intimation to take in the Pitts). He received Ld.
Howick very coldly, and made the inquiries about Mrs. Fox from ye other
Ministers.

A communication from Ld. Grenville through Ld. Howick to General
Fitzpatrick to take Ld. H. into the Cabinet. Ld. Howick acknowledged
Ld. Holland was the fittest to succeed in the Foreign Department,
but that he could not undertake to lead in the H. of Commons if he
remained at the Admiralty, the fatigue being too great. T. Grenville
grumbled at the Admiralty, as the public looked to Ld. Spencer if a
change were necessary, besides disliking the duties of the office.[238]
Ld. Grenville wanted Tom to lead the H. of Commons; and there was
a proposal of his being made Secretary for ye Home Department, and
Windham kicked upstairs by a peerage, in order that he might, when Ld.
Howick goes to the Lords, be considered as the head--impracticable from
T. Grenville’s coldness of character, and, I think, want of the right
stuff in his head.

[Sidenote: CABINET CHANGES]

The strongest reason which the Grenvilles have for proposing the Whigs
to the Opposition in forming a new Administration, is that they can
depend upon them in case of a quarrel with the King, which they could
not on such men as Hawkesbury and Castlereagh. They are out of humour
with Windham. On ye 19th September they proposed the peerage, and hoped
he might bite at it, to escape from the Norfolk election, which will be
strongly contested. Peace perhaps might be easier with Whigs, but tho’
Ld. Grenville is strenuous for peace, there seems to be very little
hopes of attaining it at present.

Prussia has offered to go to war with France, and, with the concurrence
of Russia, to guarantee Hanover to the King of England. Ld. Howick is
very warlike. Whitbread has been absurdly extravagant in his views and
demands; talks of the Cabinet!

Ld. Holland has agreed to accept the Privy Seal, with a full
understanding, however, with Ld. Howick, that his views are directed
to the Foreign Office, and that he only accepts this insignificant
charge to serve the party, and satisfy that part of his uncle’s party
who might suspect the Grenvilles, were he overlooked.[239] All this
was subject to the approbation of the Prince of Wales and his uncle’s
friends. He stipulated that in case of peace, he might resign in favour
of Lauderdale, and go, if he chose, to Paris. Ld. Grenville agreed
to his changing Privy Seal for Paris, and that Lauderdale might come
in; not otherwise, as retiring from office would be injurious to the
Governt.

An affectionate letter to Ld. H. from the Prince, expressing his wish
that Ld. H. might be successor to his uncle in the Seals.

_20th._--A letter of Murat to the King of Prussia, addressing him
by the style of ‘Mon Frère,’ is said to have been the origin of
these movements of the Prussians against France.[240] Another is
that Lucchesini has discovered, and communicated to his Court,
Bonaparte’s scheme of annexing the Prussian States in Westphalia to
Murat’s dominions. Some think Lucchesini is capable of having made
this communication on the suggestion of Bonaparte, who would be glad
of a pretext to reduce the Prussian power. The Prussians and Saxons
are 240,000 ready to take the field. The French 220,000 to oppose
them. Prince Louis,[241] son of Prince Ferdinand of Prussia, is the
person who has the most hostility against France, and who is eager for
military renown. Austria is determined to remain neutral.

Windham peremptorily refused the peerage. When he talked to Petty of
the proposal, he mentioned it as being whimsical, that, as the great
distress was the want of talent in the H. of Commons, they should
therefore move their best speaker into the House of Lords.[242] Ld.
Howick is _now_ desirous of retaining the Admiralty; he is satisfied of
the impolicy of giving up such a mine of patronage, and has, in idea,
been long enough in possession of the Foreign Office to be weary of it,
but unluckily it is too late. The Foxites have not _one_ office which
has patronage annexed to it.

[Sidenote: THE NEW CABINET]

The plan is finally fixed:--Mr. Grenville, Admiralty; Ld. Howick, F.
Department; Ld. H., Privy Seal; Ld. Sidmouth, P. of the Council; Ld.
Fitzwm., Seat in Cabinet, without office; Tierney, Board of Control.
Ld. Howick had a thousand _freaks_, for they were too wild to be called
plans, the burthen of which was that if he could not do things his own
way, he would go out. He assured Ld. Holland through the General, and
to _himself_ also, that he considered himself merely as _locum tenens_
during the period of his being in the H. of Commons, and that his being
in the office ought not to be considered as an obstacle to Ld. H.’s
views, he knowing also what Mr. Fox’s intentions had been upon that
subject. In short, as far as professions and assurances can go, we must
feel satisfied that he will make the offer when he is removed to the
H. of Lords. The General says, ‘I have no doubt he is sincere now, but
when the impression of Fox’s loss wears away, perhaps his intentions
may change.’

_22nd._--Messenger from Lauderdale. He has had a severe bilious attack,
caused, D. Stewart thinks, a good deal by the sad tidings from England.
Talleyrand full of overstrained civility. England, he said, had a right
to dictate her own terms, she being in a most commanding station.
France has only to be careful not to concede too much. They want to
have back Surinam and Demerara. L. has demanded Cuba in exchange.
Capture of Buenos Ayres produced little sensation at Paris.[243]
Emperor left Paris. Ld. Morpeth is to go to Berlin immediately.[244]

_25th._--In consequence of Ld. M.’s declining to go on acct. of the
shortness of notice, Ld. Henry Petty having expressed some desire to
go, Ld. Howick gladly caught at it, and it was mentioned to the King.
Upon Ld. Holland hearing of it, he did his utmost, both in conversation
and by letter, to dissuade Petty, who was so much shook by Ld. H.’s
arguments that he was as eager to seek a pretext to avoid going as
he had been before to get one to go, and he availed himself of some
difficulties about putting the Seals into commission. Ld. Carlisle
wished Morpeth to go, and accordingly he has agreed, and very kindly is
to take B. Frere[245] with him, whom he will leave, in case he comes
away, as Chargé d’Affaires, which will be getting B. F. employment, and
perhaps a grade hereafter.

Lds. Grenville and Howick wrote to the Prince after Mr. Fox’s death.
His answer to Lord Howick was that he wished for no change but that
Ld. Holland should have his uncle’s Seals. But, being in the meantime
informed of the arrangements agreed upon, he wrote to Ld. G. that his
political interest was buried in the grave with Mr. Fox, but that, as
it was probable he might at some future time be again forced to public
matters, he thought it proper to say that he was ready to give his
support to the present Administration, on acct. of the friends he had
in it, and that he should always look to ye friends of Mr. Fox, and
particularly to Ld. H., as his own political friends.

[Sidenote: LORD HOLLAND’S POST]

The Duke of Bedford in writing, and the D. of Norfolk in conversation,
have also expressed to Ld. H. that they look upon him as his uncle’s
representative in the Whig Party. Ld. H. stipulated, as it was his
uncle’s wish, that the first blue ribbon was to be given to the D. of
Norfolk. Agreed to.

Ld. Holland strenuously against sending any person to Prussia, but to
allow whatever business there may be to be transacted by the Minister,
Jacobi,[246] who is at Hambro’ [_sic_] on the part of Prussia, and by
Mr. Thornton on our part, our Minister at Hambro’.

On the 10th October, the funeral of Mr. Fox. He was accompanied to the
grave by his old friends, public and private, and by the Ministers. I
was present in a gallery erected for me in the Abbey over the grave.

           *       *       *       *       *

_12th December, 1806._[247]--The fragment of the Prussian army may
amount altogether to about 50,000 men. Old Kalkreuth, who made his
escape after the Battle of Auerstadt, is in Dantzic with 12,000.
The King is not at Petersburg, but whenever he is, his councils are
directed by Haugwitz more than ever, which makes him perfectly nugatory.

The Russian Proclamation, which declares the necessity of Wallachia
and Moldavia being occupied by their troops,[248] has excited alarm
and distrust in the Austrian Cabinet. Those Courts are wrangling about
punctilios, just as if Bonaparte were not alive. The Austrians want
to coalesce with Russia, but they are afraid and undecided; however,
Pozzo di Borgo, who is in the Russian Military Service, is despatched
to Vienna to see whether he can bring about any co-operation. Little
can be expected even if he does, Bonaparte has so completely secured
his rear and kept a communication with France by means of menacing and
cajoling, that all attempts against him are idle.

[Sidenote: KING OF SWEDEN]

The King of Sweden, tho’ very wrong-headed, and ill-gifted with that
rare commodity common sense, has some notion of honour and high sense
of it. Bernadotte, either at Altona or Hamburg, made some overtures to
the Swedish Minister, saying that Bonaparte had always considered the
King of Sweden as the only high-spirited Monarch; talked of the old
alliance between France and Sweden, and threw out hints of Bonaparte’s
willingness to give him Norway. The only notice the K. of Sweden
bestowed upon this was a severe reproof and recall of his Minister for
listening to any proposals from the French, and giving instructions
to have the whole proceeding laid before the Danish Government, in
order to show them the perfidy of the French, who were soliciting their
friendship.[249] Our Government intend to augment his subsidy, and hold
out a prospect hereafter of giving him ships to assist in the conquest
of an island, Martinique or Guadalupe. The Danes are terrified, and
will yield Holstein if the French should be peremptory; not, it is to
be hoped, with impunity on our part.

The Opposition are full of jokes against Tierney; they say the
dissolution was entirely his scheme, that by its suddenness they might
be taken by surprise and unprepared, but that it appeared that he
himself was the least prepared, and the most surprised. He lost the
Borough.[250]

An abundance of speculators have gone with English goods to Buenos
Ayres, enough to make a glut in the market, and merchants have sent
over, it is said, to buy English goods, as they will be quite a drug
there. Auchmuty[251] is gone with considerable reinforcements thither.

General Craufurd’s[252] expedition is to land at Val Paraiso in the
South Sea; it was delayed so long that the passage by Cape Horn
would be impracticable, therefore they must go round the Cape, a
voyage of eight months. This expedition was delayed on account of the
negotiation. Peace was once expected, but even then it was a mistaken
policy, in my humble opinion, as Bonaparte is an enemy who will respect
you more, if you will not only show your teeth but bite with them too.

The Government of the United States has detected the conspiracy which
has long been gathering to break off the Northern from the Southern
States, and so to make the Allegany Mountains the boundary. Mr.
Burr,[253] who killed General Hamilton, is the head of it, and orders
have been given to arrest him. General Wilkinson with the army is in
the South and declared for Burr.

  [Illustration:

    _J. Hoppner Pinscit, 1798_      _Emery Walker Ph.sc._


  _John, Viscount Boringdon_

  (_afterwards Earl of Morley_)]

[Sidenote: BURR’S CONSPIRACY]

Burr laid the whole plot open to our Minister, and asked the
assistance of England; Merry transmitted the communication to Ld.
Mulgrave,[254] who, as usual, returned no answer.

Ld. Grenville calls the American a _Mob Government_, and one too weak
to carry its own measures into effect.

The Scotch Peers elections have gone well; Ld. Melville was cruelly
disappointed, he expected to carry four, and only carried Ld. Aberdeen.
Kinnaird behaved imprudently and foolishly; however, Ld. Lauderdale’s
dexterity and activity carried him through. Till the very moment before
the election, Lord Melville reckoned upon carrying _four_.

Deliberations in the Cabinet upon an attack on Mexico; Ld. Grenville
sent to Ld. H. Sr. Arthur Wellesley’s plan.[255] Sir Arthur Wellesley
appears to have obtained all his information with respect to the
accessible points for attacking S. America, New Spain, from a Mr.
Frazier.

_18th December._--Lauderdale entertains no doubt whatever that the note
so very offensive in its language to him was written, and also that it
was written by the Emperor himself; and, moreover, that the Ministers,
to avoid a severe reprimand from him for having ventured to suppress
it, have thus impudently ventured to publish it officially. The other
speculation is that the order for the publication of the correspondence
was sent from Berlin, and the clerks published _all_, _brouillons_
included. This is the most probable.

The melancholy year of 1806 died with another loss: the D. of
Richmond[256] died at Goodwood of suppressed gout and a liver
complaint, discovered only after death.

News of the recapture of Buenos Ayres believed by the Government. It
rests upon the declaration of a Portuguese Captain, who reached Lisbon
in 43 days from Pernambuco; he says a Spanish schooner came in there
dismasted, who was the bearer of dispatches to Old Spain, giving an
account of the retaking of the town after a severe contest. It must
be highly gratifying to Ld. Howick that he should have made his manly
exposition of Sr. Home Popham’s improper conduct before this news, when
the shabby people will be as ready to cry against the business, as they
have been ready to praise it. An instance of the money-getting spirit
of Sr. Home came to my knowledge lately. He wrote to the merchants
at Manchester advising the exportation of certain goods, but to his
own agent he bid him send him, upon speculation, a large quantity of
silk stockings, with a hint that this order should not transpire. B.
Frere assured me he was acquainted with the silk-stocking merchant who
supplied the articles.

[Sidenote: LORD ELDON AND THE KING]

The business of the Princess,[257] which is now before the Cabinet, is
highly perplexing, and from the answer given by the K. to the Minute
of the Cabinet, there is good reason to suspect he has some secret
advisers. The style is much too business-like, and shows too much
knowledge of law to be his own. This suspicion is confirmed by the line
of conduct taken in the H. of Lds.; it is quite distinct from Canning’s
in the H. of Commons, as they did not move the Address. Ld. Eldon
had for many years the management of the D. of Portland’s estates;
in consequence of which, he had frequent access to him, and thereby
acquired considerable influence over his mind. The King has appointed
the D. of Portland his Master of his own private Monies. Thus upon
pretence of his private affairs, the K. has a channel of communication
with Ld. Eldon, which Ministers can in no way get at or interfere with.

There are avowed schisms amongst the Opposition; Canning is distinct
from Perceval, and from Castlereagh. If the _great man_ of all does
meddle in the H. of Lds., those in the Commons are not entrusted with
the secret of his benign influence.

A curious petition under the Treating Act against Messrs. Windham and
Coke, curious because it is not brought by the rejected candidate, who,
on the contrary, declares he is not privy to the petition. It is the
result of female spleen and revenge, a retaliation upon Mr. Windham for
an election trick played by his party against these incensed heroines,
Mesdames Atkins and Berney.[258] They had induced some electors to
come forward and petition under the Treating Act; the three candidates
unwisely consented to treat, not suspecting mischief could ensue from
any other quarter. Mrs. Atkins was a celebrated actress, formerly of
the name of Walpole. Her coadjutor is as great a virago as herself.
‘_La vengeance est douce à l’esprit d’une femme._’ Windham had a double
return, so will sit for some rotten borough. Serjeant Lens, who is his
counsel, rather despairs of making out a defensible case.

The expedition of General Craufurd, which was _not_ to take Teneriffe
on its way to the S. Sea because it would take too much time, is now
loitering and beating off the Cape de Verd Islands for want of convoy,
which convoy has not at this moment quitted England.

_January 4th, 1807._--The American Treaty is at length signed; it must
go to the U. States for ratification before it can be made public.
The only point gained is the settling the ill-humour, and fixing the
continuous voyage;[259] the seamen question is still unsettled.

[Sidenote: DEBATE ON THE NEGOTIATION]

_6th January._--Last night upon the subject of the negotiation,
Whitbread took the most hostile line against Government, arguments
mingled with invective against their conduct from the beginning to the
end of the negotiation. He _applauded_ Ld. Yarmouth’s proceedings,
censured the recalling him, as well as the motives assigned for it, and
found fault with everything done by Lauderdale; concluding the whole in
the most personal manner to Grey, by moving the _same_ amendment that
Grey himself had moved on the Address to the King when Ld. Whitworth’s
papers were under consideration.[260] Ld. Yarmouth, conceiving himself
to be the injured party, spoke with warmth against Ministers; Perceval,
with bitterness and scurrility against Fox. This strange conduct of
Whitbread’s will be productive of great mischief, and unfortunately
Ld. Holland, from an apprehension of being overcome if he risked
mentioning his uncle’s name in public, did not speak on the night of
the debate in ye House of Lords. His silence and Whitbread’s garrulity
will corroborate the French story of the Fox party being discontented
with Lauderdale’s conduct. This, however, can and will be justified
immediately by his speaking, with or without an opportunity.

During the debate L. sat next to the Prince, who seemed mightily to
relish Ld. Yarmouth’s occasional raps at the Grenvilles, and shortly
after opened very freely upon his dissatisfaction; told him to sound
H. upon the subject of the Pss., in which he spoke as if he suspected
he was _given up_, and to ascertain whether, if so, he, Ld. H., was
prepared to go out upon it; deeply deplored the loss of Fox, who was
a _man_, fair, open, and attached. L. collected, which combined with
other circumstances that had come to his knowledge, that Ld. Moira
is playing a deep game, by trying to draw a line in the Cabinet of
Prince’s friends and Grenville’s. He has never recovered the double
disappointment, first, of not being made First Lord of the Treasury
and Patron of Scotland, and, secondly, of not being acknowledged the
successor of Fox in the Whig party. That is to say, the Prince styles
himself the head of the Whig party, in imitation of his uncle, the D.
of Cumberland, who was so in 1764, forgetting how foolish that was, but
how much more foolish it is in an Heir Apparent! However, with this
idea thrust upon him by Ld. Moira, he is the more likely to concur
with Moira’s views, who would content himself with being styled his
assistant upon such an assumption.

Ld. Holland dined at the India House where Ld. Minto had been sworn
in;[261] Ld. M.’s spirit excessively depressed. If annoyed at going,
why seek the appointment by such means?

[Sidenote: WHITBREAD’S SPEECH]

_7th January, 1807._--A universal groan, a spontaneous, unanimous
feeling of disgust in the H. of Commons, when Perceval attacked the
character of Fox. The tune of it was that all the kingdoms of Europe
had sunk by treachery, bribery of their principal persons; that
Talleyrand, the base, corrupt Prime Minister of France, had been the
agent; yet this _immaculate_ character was the _attached_ friend of
Mr. ----.[262] The House shuddered, and interrupted the pronouncing of
the name. He animadverted upon the correspondence carried on between
them. Whitbread’s speech made a considerable impression upon some of
the most valuable men in the House, but was not conclusively reasoned;
he having completely overlooked the necessity of keeping faithful to
our allies, the Russians. Some think that the greatest mischief done
by his speech was the drawing out some very warlike sentiments from
Grey, who answered both injudiciously and inconsistently (with former
declarations) with regard to the duration and principle of the war,
which he stated with all the exaggerated declamation of a pupil of the
Pitt school. This is a most unfortunate error, and is the more to be
regretted, as the case upon ye papers was so strong, and might have
been defended upon the true principles of Mr. Fox’s pacific policy.

Roscoe[263] spoke yesterday for his maiden speech on the Thetford
Petition: Windham says his manner is dull, coarse, and provincial. I
do not think his talents are such as will enable him to _add_ to his
reputation by his public speaking.

_February 8th._--Serjeant Lens called to give me an acct. of the state
of Norfolk Committee. Windham is in great agitation, even beyond what
such a circumstance ought to excite. _His_ imprudence has been quite
incredible; however, nothing decisive has yet appeared against him.
There were two of his indiscreet letters afloat; one has been rescued,
but the other is still in the hands of the enemy--the one of the most
mischievous purport unluckily. Each letter was a threatening to dismiss
the persons, to whom they were addressed, from their employments, if
they did not vote, and in the one in the field Ld. Grenville’s name is
used.

Prince came and stayed a considerable time. He is looking less ill than
he did a month ago. Ld. H. advised him to do nothing about the Pss.,
telling him in as civil terms as he could that his unpopularity in the
country was so great, that any publication of proceedings on his part
would only confirm the belief in a conspiracy against her. He also
advised him to conciliate the Duke of Gloucester,[264] whose ambitious
views of alliance with the young Princess were apparent, and tho’ not
necessary to encourage, were worthy at least of observation, as he
might secure his friendship by civility. He expressed great abhorrence
of him, said he was a fool and a Saint: said it had often occurred to
him that his brother, the Duke of Cambridge,[265] would be a proper
husband for his daughter, that such connections were common amongst
Catholics, and that Parliament could grant a dispensation as fully as
the Pope. He has promised to take no steps without consulting his legal
advisers.

[Sidenote: LORD MINTO’S PAPER]

Ld. Minto came to take leave, he was to set off for India in half an
hour. Prince seized and dragged him into the little room, said, ‘H.
you may come too,’ and then asked Ld. Minto to give him the statement
which was drawn up by him and Burke on the King’s recovery in 1789,
in which they had entered fully into the Queen’s conduct during H.M.
illness.[266] Ld. Minto was extremely disturbed, and hardly knew how to
reply. He stammered and said it was of no use, such a paper now would
be of no service, except _historically_. However the P. pressed him so
hard, that he was compelled to acknowledge that it was in Ly. Minto’s
possession.

Prince had been at Windsor the night before. King’s blindness worse:
great flightiness upon two topics, upon the name of Sir Sidney Smith
being mentioned, and upon the Irish bishops, whom he said were all
Catholics and should never preach before him. P. seems to have been
greatly struck at the Pss. observation, about four months after their
marriage, on Soulavie’s _Memoirs of Catherine_, whom she said was a
great princess, and served for an example ‘_à toutes princesses_.’ He
seriously believes that it has passed in her mind to adopt Catherine
as a model, and as a proof he declares that she wore usually men’s
clothes, and received many navy officers in that attire at Plymouth.

A Cabinet on the 9th in consequence of letters from ye Duke of
Bedford.[267] The Catholics are proceeding with their petition, and
some of the eager ones persist in laying it before Parliament this
Session. Ministers are urged to determine speedily what is to be done
for the Catholics, in order to prevent the petition, if possible, from
coming forward. He thinks nothing will satisfy the C. at present short
of three concessions:--

1. The insertion of the same clause in their favour in the Mutiny Bill
of England, that was inserted some years before the Union in the Mutiny
Bill of Ireland.

2ndly. Their admission to be Sheriffs of Counties.

3rdly. Their admission to Corporations.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

The Cabinet determined upon granting the first, but object to the
second, as a point that involves the whole Catholic Question and
is objectionable on the same grounds with their total exemption,
without being attended with the same advantages to themselves. The 3rd
must depend upon individual Corporations. The Ministry have already
declared, and are ready to repeat their wish, that the Catholics
should be in full possession of every advantage secured to them by the
existing laws. Such the Government of Ireland has shown to be the wish
of the Ministry, and it is only by continuing the same system, that the
object of procuring the admission of Catholics into the Corporation
can be attained. The sketch of a letter to the D. of Bedford was then
read, and agreed to be submitted to the King. Besides the topics
already mentioned, it referred to an understanding that prevailed in
Ireland when the proposed clause of the Mutiny Bill was carried in the
Irish Parliament by Lds. Clare and Hobart, that a similar clause would
be inserted in the English Mutiny Bill. Very doubtful whether the K.
would consent; also doubtful how far many of the members would continue
to persevere in pressing it upon him. A proof of his indisposition
towards Catholics:--in a private audience with Ld. Howick, he expressed
surprise at the conduct of the Elector of Saxony, whom he had hitherto
considered an honourable man, ‘tho’ nothing better can be expected of a
Catholic, but a man must be greatly degraded to break an oath. I would
sooner submit to be trampled upon and killed.’

Determined, if the others would not press the matter, that Lds. Howick,
Henry Petty, and Holland should go out. Some think that the trifle
required is sufficient to produce the relapse of insanity, and that it
would be as well to have the _burst_ upon the great point of all.

_Feb. 10th._--Answer from the King. H.M. approves of what his Ministry
have said on the subject of the application to have Catholic Sheriffs,
but he, ‘Trusts the Parlt. would never under any circumstances agree to
the clause in the Mutiny Act. H.M.’s objections do not result from any
slight motive. They have never varied, for they arise from principles
by which he has been guided thro’ life, and to which he is determined
to adhere. He had hoped that the question would never again have been
agitated.’ (A copy from the original.)

In consequence of this answer from H.M. there was a meeting of the
Cabinet this eve. in which it was determined unanimously to persevere.
A respectful answer to H.M. was accordingly prepared, stating at full
length the reasons which induced the Cabinet to persist in their
opinion and determined them to bring the question before Parlt. It is
uncertain whether the K. will yield, dismiss them, or try to divide
them. Ld. Sidmouth and Ld. Ellenboro’ have behaved well, and even
stoutly. Erskine betrays great backwardness, tho’ he must go with the
rest. Whilst the letter for the K. was read, he affected to be asleep,
but Ld. Holland roused him and called his attention to this _important_
paper.

The King very cordial and civil to the Ministers at the Levée. In
his audience with Ld. Sidmouth he listened to the arguments for the
measure, and even dropped a sort of acquiescence. Erskine held a most
foolish, and even mischievous conversation with him. He told the K.
that had he been in the Irish Parlt., the measures for the Catholics
should not have passed without opposition: on which the K. complimented
him, and said, ‘I believe indeed, my Lord Chancellor, that you are
a good Protestant.’ ‘That, Sir, is my proudest title.’ The King is
certainly tractable, but told Ld. Sidmouth that he should take 24 hours
to consider of his answer to the Minute of the Cabinet. Ld. Grenville
accompanied the Cabinet Minute with a private letter of his own, which
pleased the K. mightily.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

_Feb. 12th._--King’s answer (exactly copied):--‘The King has maturely
considered what is stated in Ld. Grenville’s letter of the 10th inst.,
and the accompanying Minute of the Cabinet. He is disposed upon
this, as upon all occasions, to do full justice to the motives which
influence any advice which may be submitted to him by Ld. Grenville and
his other confidential servants; and however painful His Majesty has
found it to reconcile to his feelings the removal of objections to any
proposal which may have even the most distant reference to a question
which has already been subject of such frequent and distressing
reflections, he will not, under the circumstances in which it is so
earnestly pressed, and adverting particularly to what took place in
1791, prevent his Ministers from submitting for the consideration
of his Parlt. the propriety of inserting the proposed clause in the
Mutiny Bill. Whilst, however, the King so far reluctantly concedes, he
considers it necessary to declare that he cannot go one step further,
and he trusts that this proof of his forbearance will secure him from
being at a future period distressed by any further proposal connected
with the question. (Signed) G. R.’

Lds. H., Howick, and Hy. Petty had resolved upon going out, if the
Cabinet had not brought forward the clause in question, or if they had
afterwards given it up and without doing anything for the Catholics
opposed their petition in Parlt. But Ld. Howick declared (as however
he frequently does when in a passion) that he would retire from public
life.

A Cabinet last night upon the subject of Buenos Ayres and S. America;
there is much difference of opinion on these questions. Ld. Howick and
Mr. Grenville are averse to the diversion of any part of our force
to such distant objects, and think every part should be employed in
Europe. Ld. Grenville looks to conquest in S. America as useful to our
trade in war, and as objects of barter in making peace. He is therefore
against the adoption of any system which would prevent us from reducing
our conquests at the time of peace. Ld. H. objects to any attack upon
S. America, except for the purpose of revolutionising, but is very
desirous some such system should be adopted. Windham is eager for the
attack anyhow; tho’ he would prefer a systematic plan, yet he will
support any measure of that tendency. It was at length agreed that
two general officers should be sent out to take command of the difft.
bodies of troops re-united before Buenos Ayres, which make an effective
force of 9000 men. General Whitelocke[268] is one, with discretionary
powers to fortify or defend Maldonado, to take or destroy Monte Video,
and to take Buenos Ayres or enter into terms with the inhabitants, as
they shall judge best for the King’s service; but to send back to Spain
all persons who took an active part against the English in the late
transactions. The desire of effacing our recent disgraces there had its
effect in determining this measure.

_19th Feb._--Went to Brighton to see my children, who are living there
for the sake of the good air, or rather to avoid the thick, bad air of
London and its neighbourhood. Mr. Allen only went with us. We stayed
Friday and Saturday; returned to town on Sunday.

The Norfolk Committee unseated Coke and Windham; Serjeant Lens made an
admirable speech.

Petty wrote to me that the Princess had determined to publish, and that
on my return I should find the ‘fire burning and cauldron bubbling’
with all the inflammable ingredients I knew of already.

Dined on Monday with Ld. Granville Leveson to meet Lady Stafford,[269]
whom I had not seen for many years except in a crowd. Seized at night
with a violent headache and cold, and some indications of fever.
Confined from that night until this day, the 2nd March, and not yet
recovered.

[Sidenote: ABOLITION OF SLAVE TRADE]

_2nd March._--The abolition of Slave Trade was carried in the H. of C.
by an immense majority, nearly 18 to 1; the opposition only 16. Mr.
Windham came to town to attend, but was prevented by a hoarseness;
wrote to Ld. Howick to notify he should oppose it in the Committee. Ld.
Castlereagh and Rose[270] absent. The Doctor’s men intended to oppose
some part in the Committee.

Catholics becoming more reasonable in Ireland. The Petition is to be
sent to Mr. Grattan instead of Ld. Howick, and it is to be brought
over by Lord Fingall[271] alone, and not by a Catholic Committee.
This will be advantageous to Ministers, as Ld. F. is open to various
modes of conciliation. Ld. Ponsonby’s[272] private letters to Ld.
Howick throw blame on the Irish Governt. He says, ‘His uncle George,
the Chancellor, is stark mad, and as rank an Orangeman as any in
Ireland’: that Elliot,[273] who knew of the Petition since July,
has been greatly to blame, and has by his cold manner repulsed the
Catholics: that Plunket,[274] the Attorney-General, is a secret enemy
to the Administration: that the Solicitor-General[275] is not good
for much, and Curran is so bad in his office, where he has almost
nothing to do, that he ought to be removed. Secret abuses are every
day discovered by the investigating accountants, but are kept very
secret, especially the two following. Mr. Eden, since his succession to
Ld. Thurlow’s Tellership, it appears, has compelled his deputy, whose
place is 1000_l._ pr. ann. and was always considered as one held for
life, under a threat of dismissal, to give him 400_l._ pr. ann. for his
brother. The deed was Ld. Auckland’s, so the poor fellow is sconced of
his 400_l._ pr. ann., a scandalous transaction, and one that the honest
will suffer by, as Ld. Howick swears the American Commission shall
not be paid as he originally designed, thus Mr. Allen will suffer for
his colleague’s dirtiness.[276] This proceeding will not be revealed,
as Ld. Buckingham was guilty of a similar action in favour of Ld.
Grenville’s family.

[Sidenote: PUBLIC ACCOUNTS INQUIRY]

T. S., one of Pitt’s oldest friends, and a man of a _studiously_ fair
character, frank and honest to bluntness and a variety of other such
descriptive features peculiar to English worth, coarseness, grossness,
rudeness, and all leading to saying he was honest, turns out to be
_franchement_ a rogue; having, it appears, appropriated to his own
private use balances of Governt. money to the amount of 9000_l._ He
is now refunding principal and interest, imploring secrecy. It is not
however determined whether he is to be prosecuted; but until it is
decided, the business is kept secret and is not revealed even to the
Cabinet. These sturdy, plain characters often prove to be the greatest
thieves. These discoveries are owing, I believe, to the Commissioners
of Public Accounts. Mr. Biddulph’s Committee of the H. of Commons[277]
has struck a general alarm into sinecure placemen and peculators, as it
is known to be composed of very active, ardently zealous reformers. Ld.
Ellenboro’, who has several lucrative offices of that sort in his gift,
complains of its taking from the Chief Justice the only recompense for
his services, which consist in having the means to provide for his
children, the salary not being sufficiently great. The Commissioners
have issued precepts for inquiry into the Colonial Establishments, a
measure not very acceptable to Windham, and they are endeavouring to
negotiate with the Bank to manage the National Debt on more reasonable
terms, from which they expect to save from 60,000_l._ to 80,000_l._ pr.
ann.

The affair of the Princess is drawing to a public disclosure of
the whole proceedings. The Prince has been advised by Romilly and
Garrow[278] to make application to the King that the charges against
the Princess may be tried in a Court of Common Law; and, on the
other hand, the Princess has been advised by her law counsellors to
publish her defence, which must lead, of course, to a publication of
the charges and evidence against her. It is said that her defence is
printing, and will be published on Wednesday.[279]

The Opposition are a disjointed, incoherent body, dissatisfied with
their situation, and with one another. Canning has made private
overtures to Ld. Grenville to be taken into office when an opportunity
presents itself, declaring himself greatly discontented with his
present associates. His demands are:--a high appointment for himself,
a place for Sturges, and a peerage for Sr. Hy. Mildmay. Ld. G. seems
not entirely disinclined to listen to such overtures. He is very
much out of humour with Whitbread for his speech on the first day of
the session, which, he scrupled not to say to Ld. Howick, betrayed
sentiments and views utterly inconsistent with those on which Ministers
had conducted the negotiation. But if Whitbread is set aside, and Ld.
Grey die, Petty would be left almost alone in the House of Commons, and
though his success there during the present session has been greater
than the most sanguine of his friends could have hoped for, still he
would require an able seconder, especially if Whitbread went eagerly
into Opposition. These considerations may weigh with Ld. G., and he may
also be desirous of having a speaker of the first rank in the House of
Commons, more connected with _himself_, and less attached to the Whig
party than Petty. Mr. Grenville is unwilling to be an every day speaker
in the House of Commons. C. Williams has no voice; Ld. Temple is not
listened to; but Canning, if brought into office now, would attach
himself to Ld. Grenville as he did to Pitt, and become his peculiar
organ in the H. of C. Ld. Wellesley has probably been the channel of
communication. Whitbread and Ld. Howick are far from being cordial, and
unfortunately the conduct of the former tends to widen every day the
breach between them, and his pretensions are so high, that independent
of the obstacles which he is himself creating, it would be difficult
for Ministry to satisfy him: nothing will content him, but to be
considered as on a par with Lauderdale for pretensions.

[Sidenote: EXPEDITION TO CONSTANTINOPLE]

There is every reason to fear that we shall be forced into war with
Turkey by the violence of Russia, though the Turks have made every
possible concession.[280] It is feared that we have already taken
possession of the Turkish fleet, and bombarded Constantinople.
Arbuthnot has orders to give the Turks the alternative of dismissing
Sebastiani, or having a war with England. Windham and T. Grenville
have, between them, given orders without the knowledge of their
colleagues, in the event of a war with Turkey, for 5000 men to be
taken from the army of Sicily, and employed in taking and garrisoning
Alexandria. Craufurd has been overtaken, and stopped from going to
Valparaiso.

Monroe has had a conversation with Ld. H. about Spanish America; he
wishes nothing to be attempted without a concert with the United
States, the country to be declared independent, and free ports to be
opened to both the invading powers. His accounts from Armstrong[281]
represent that there are great differences among the French generals,
and that this alone has prevented Bonaparte’s return to Paris where his
presence was also required.

_March 8th._--The Princess has not published her defence, but it is
said she has got it printed at a private press belonging to Perceval,
and she threatens to publish it next Friday, if not previously received
at Court on Thursday. It is said that her coarseness of language
disgusts even her partisans.

[Sidenote: CABINET CHANGES]

The overtures of Canning are taken into consideration, and have been
the subject of conversation between Lds. Grenville, Howick, and
Holland. There is an idea that Lauderdale, Whitbread, and Canning may
be introduced into the Cabinet. Canning now requires Charles Long,[282]
Huskisson, and old G. Rose[283] to have places. Some of these and
Ld. Camden are only named _pro forma_, and would be sacrificed if
he could be taken in. How room can be made does not very readily
appear. When the Doctor was told of Canning’s proposals, he said,
that in the present stage of the business, he was not called upon to
interfere, but that if it was proposed to bring Canning into office,
his line was taken.[284] There is no reason whatever for any change
at present, except the alleged necessity of dismissing Windham on
account of his great mismanagement in his office and his conduct as
War Secretary, and the reduction of strength in the H. of Commons,
especially should Windham go with Opposition. But the real cause is
said to be Lord Grenville’s restlessness of disposition, which makes
him dissatisfied at the end of six months with every arrangement he
forms. Ld. H. is averse to these changes on the score of unfairness
to Addington, who must be made the sacrifice, especially as they
conducted themselves (_apparently_, a cautious saving always necessary,
however, for the Doctor’s conduct) well in the late discussions with
the King, and because he is naturally averse to the return of so many
of the Pitt-ites to power; and also that Canning’s introduction to
the Cabinet is the elevation of a rival to Petty. The latter opinion,
however, is more my own, and has inspired me with great distrust to
the proceedings. Petty, who at my earnest desire has been apprised of
the affair, as the injunction was that it was not to transpire, is, of
course, against it. Therefore if Ld. Howick (over whom Ld. Grenville
has acquired great influence) is of the same mind, there will be little
or no difficulty in counteracting it. Whitbread’s impatience for
office, and Ld. Howick’s extreme desire to have no political difference
with him, makes him lend a readier ear to such a plan than he would
otherwise do.

There is an expedition to be undertaken, which on acct. of Erskine’s
extraordinary imprudence in talking, is to be kept a secret from the
Cabinet, and only known to a few. Bad accounts from Drummond[285] of
the Court of Sicily; strong measures are to be resorted to without
delay to bring them to a more reasonable line of conduct. All Frenchmen
in the service of Sicily to be dismissed; none but Sicilians to be
employed in the service of the State; nominations of all officers in
the army to be left to the British Commander-in-Chief; grievances to
be redressed by the convocation of the Sicilian Parlt. If these terms
are not complied with, we are to declare we cannot defend the island,
and if refused, force employed to effectuate them. General Fox, Sr.
John Moore, and Drummond are to be associated in a joint Commission
for this important object.[286] Sr. Sidney Smith, who has been gained
over by the Queen and is completely subservient to her, is ordered on a
different service. The fury and violence of the Queen’s character have
not abated by age, and her _other_ passions have as little diminished.
Ld. Ellenboro’ said, in the discussion of this business, that our
Sicilian Alliance seemed to him to cost £600,000 pr. ann., for no other
purpose than to maintain a ---- house at Palermo.

Overtures for negotiations between France and Russia. Our Governt. have
expressed through Ld. Douglas[287] our readiness to become parties to a
negotiation for peace, and have expressed our wish that if a Congress
is to be held for that purpose, it should be appointed at Copenhagen;
but it has been distinctly explained to Russia, that the French
Colonies shall not be restored in return for the restitution of the
conquests made from Prussia.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

There are hopes that the Irish Catholics may be induced to postpone
their Petition till another session. Ld. Ponsonby’s letters are
favourable to this expectation, and Mr. Butler has expressed the same
hopes to Ld. Holland.

_14th March._--Before it is decided whether Ministers are to go out,
or accommodate their present differences with the K., I shall try and
collect as well as I can, all the important particulars which have
led things to the present vexatious state. It was the intention of Ld.
Grenville, not only to extend the provisions of the Irish Act of 1793
to the whole British Army, but also to open Staff appointments to the
Catholics, but this dispatch to the King was expressed with some degree
of ambiguity, so that it might be construed to mean that he intended
only to extend the provisions of the Irish Act to this country. It
was so understood by the King, Lds. Sidmouth, and Howick; and when
transmitted to Ireland and read by Mr. Elliot to the Catholics, it
appeared so ambiguous, that when they demanded an explanation of this
point, Mr. E. wrote to Ld. Spencer for instructions how to answer them.
This letter was sent to Lord Grenville, and answered by him without any
consultation with his colleagues. In his answer he expressed surprise
that Mr. Elliot should have had any difficulty upon the subject, and
authorised him to inform the Catholics that it was the intention of
Governt. to remove all disabilities whatever in the army attaching to
members of their Church.

When Ld. Sidmouth understood the misconception under which he had
laboured with regard to the meaning of the proposed clause, he appeared
to be extremely distressed, and expressed himself very doubtful
whether he should not enter into an explanation with the King, in
order to explain his own conduct in the whole affair. But at length he
determined that, if no communication was made on the subject by the
Cabinet, he should take no notice whatever of it; as it was uncertain
in what light the dispatch might have been viewed by the King, and
whether he had understood by it that the new clauses were to be exactly
the same as those of the Irish Act in 1793, or to apply also to the
Staff appointments. It was judged proper by the Cabinet to say nothing
of this difficulty and contrariety of opinions to the King, but to
send to him the proposed clauses, which it was found afterwards more
convenient to be made into a separate Bill, and to leave him to object
to them if they were different from what he was prepared for.

This having been done, and Ld. Howick having waited upon him on
Wednesday, 4th March, he remarked that the clauses went further than
the Irish Mutiny Bill, and when Ld. Howick explained to him how far
they were to be carried, he started, and exclaimed, ‘I’m sorry for
it, I can’t approve of it’; and in the course of their conversation
on the subject, in which Ld. Howick urged all the arguments for the
measure, he appeared not to be more reconciled, but as Ld. Howick
understood, he still gave his consent that the Bill in its present
form should be brought into Parlt. On coming out of the closet, Lord
Howick communicated his conversation to Ld. Grenville and Ld. Sidmouth,
the former of whom remarked, that since Lord Howick had had this
conversation with the King, he should not speak on the subject to His
Majesty, as he knew it to be so disagreeable to him. Ld. Sidmouth, it
appears, did hold some conversation on the subject to the King, in
which he repeated Ld. Howick’s conversation in a sense which induced
the K. to believe that the additional clauses would not be brought
into Parliament till some further communications were held with him.
Ld. Howick, having a different impression of his conversation, brought
the proposed Bill into the House, which was read the first time, and
ordered to be printed.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

On Monday, the 9th, or Tuesday, the 10th, Ld. Grenville received a
mysterious letter from Ld. Sidmouth regretting that he must differ
from his colleagues on so important a point as the Catholic Bill, and
requesting to have a conversation with him on the subject. From this
conversation it appeared that he was determined to oppose the Bill in
the House of Lords, and that his friends should take the same line in
the H. of Commons. As it appeared from this and other circumstances
that the King and his friends were resolved to oppose the Bill, it
became a question what course it was proper for Ministers to pursue.
It was proposed by some to bring the Bill through the Commons, so as
to pledge that House on the subject, and if any placemen voted against
it, to turn them out instantly, or propose doing so to the King; and if
this measure should not be assented to by him, not to insist upon it
immediately, nor yet quite give it up, but bring the Bill into the H.
of Lords, and on its rejection in that House, to resign, and commence
an active and vigorous Opposition. But to this course of proceeding
it was objected by Ld. Grenville that it would lead to a protracted
contest between the King and the Ministry, which, in the present state
of affairs, could not but be prejudicial to the country; and the
question was therefore proposed whether they should resign, or yield
the question in dispute.

This was argued at his house on Wednesday, 11th, in the evening, at
a meeting consisting of Ld. Grenville, Mr. Grenville, Lds. Howick,
Holland, Henry Petty. Both the Grenvilles said they were ready to go
out if their colleagues thought they could not retreat with honour,
but they showed themselves very unwilling to that measure. Petty said
the same, with the same reluctant offer. The great argument for not
breaking with the King on this point was that this case would appear
a bad one to the public, as it might be plausibly argued that they
had deceived the King and committed his Governt. to more than he had
authorised them to grant. Lds. Howick and Holland, who were the most
averse to concession, were induced at length to give up, seeing that
their colleagues, though they offered to resign upon this point, did it
reluctantly and with a grudge; and being also satisfied that the whole
transaction with the King might be represented in the light that was
argued by the others.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

On Thursday, the 12th, Ld. Howick had an audience of the King, in which
the K. behaved to him in the most civil manner, paid him compliments to
himself and family, lamented that Ld. Howick had so far misunderstood
him in their last conversation, as to imagine that he had his consent
to propose the Bill to Parlt., but declared himself satisfied that
this was a mere misapprehension on his own side, in consequence of his
understanding the reverse to be Ld. Howick’s idea of the conversation
from Ld. Sidmouth soon after he parted from Ld. Howick. He assured
Ld. Howick that he had spoken of the affair to no persons out of the
Cabinet, except to persons of his own family; that he had taken no
measures to form an Administration, and that if he must separate from
his present advisers, he trusted that, as he had behaved and should
behave honourably to them, they would not retire from his service till
he had made arrangements to supply their place. He expressed himself in
the most flattering manner to Ld. Howick personally, and remarked that
he had not been aware till lately of his sentiments on the Catholic
question. It seems, when Ld. Sidmouth told him the week before what
were Ld. Howick’s opinions on that subject, he started with evident
surprise, from which it was argued some days ago that in the end he
would yield. Ld. Howick endeavoured to extract from him what was the
most he would concede in the present question to the Catholics, but
found him resolved not to go beyond the Irish Act of 1793. When Ld.
Howick mentioned the extending the same to the Navy, he started and
expressed disapprobation. When Ld. Howick said, if the clauses were
extended to the Catholics in England, they must also be extended to the
Protestant Dissenters (who were not included in the Irish Act, because
the Test Act was abolished in Ireland in 1774 or 1775), he started
again, and exclaimed, ‘But this is attacking the Establishment.’ In a
word, he consents to the extension of the Act of ’93 to England, but to
nothing more.

Rumours are afloat of the resignation of the Doctor, of the whole
Ministry going out, of the Catholic Bill being abandoned, etc.; and
Canning--the worthless Canning!--who was eight days ago actually in
_terms_ with Ld. Grenville, actually treating with Ld. Grenville and
holding with him a private correspondence for the purpose of being
taken into office, is now thick with Perceval, and ready, they say,
to oppose any Bill brought forward to relieve the Catholics. The
behaviour of the Doctor is still problematical. Ld. Grenville is
greatly exasperated with him, but Ld. Holland, with more indulgence
than justice, is disposed to view his conduct more favourably, and to
believe that his misconception of the measure was real, and his sorrow
unfeigned when he discovered what was intended to be done. But Ld.
Sidmouth certainly misrepresented Ld. Howick’s conversation with him to
the King, and it is now said that he has been intriguing for the last
ten days with Perceval. The D. of Cumberland was very busy in the H.
of Lords communicating to his friends the joyful news of a change of
Ministry.

The clauses were sent to Windsor on Tuesday, March 3rd, and returned by
the King the same evening, without any animadversion or objection; on
which they were instantly despatched by a messenger to Ireland. Very
suspicious against the veracity of H.M.

_15th March._--(On Friday, the 13th, Ld. Sidmouth did offer to resign,
but it was not accepted by Ld. Grenville.)

There was a Cabinet to-day at which neither Ld. Ellenboro’ or Sidmouth
assisted. It was then determined to withdraw the Bill which had given
His Majesty so much uneasiness, but to reserve to the members of the
Cabinet as individuals to express their opinion on the Catholic claims
if brought before Parlt. by the Catholics, which measure, however, the
members of the Cabinet pledged themselves not to encourage or recommend
the Catholics to adopt.

The reasons for giving up the Bill were as follows:--

1st. The K. considered himself as pledged to no more than ye Irish Act
of ’93, and was determined to resist any further concession to the
Catholics. But the mere extension of the Irish Act of 1793 would not
tend in any degree to satisfy the C., nor to allay their discontent,
while it would be unjust and unfair to the English Dissenters, whom it
would place on a worse footing than the Irish Catholics.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

2nd. But if the Bill, modified and reduced as it is by the King, would
be useless and objectionable, the prosecution of the original Bill
could not be persisted in, without incurring the reproach of having
taken advantage of the King; of having deceived him into acquiescence
with a measure not properly explained to him; and when the mistake was
cleared up, of having made use of the opportunity to commit the House
of Commons on a measure so decidedly contrary to his opinion. If the
Bill was dropped on acct. of those last considerations, the Ministry
must either resign, or go on with the disadvantage of having abandoned
a measure of so much importance, and of having been baffled by the K.
and a most contemptible colleague. In their voluntary resignation there
were many objections. It would preclude them from employing their
present strength in the H. of Commons in addressing the King against
the change of his confidential advisers, because whatever might be
the cause of their resignation, the act, if voluntary, necessarily
compelled the King to look for other advisers; and till those advisers
were tried, it would appear factious to move addresses against them.
Besides this reason for not resigning, the question of the C. was not
popular in the kingdom, and a cry could be easily raised against it and
its friends. It was therefore resolved to go on for the present, but as
the King had now discovered his strength, and as little confidence or
cordiality could longer exist between him and his present Ministers, it
was determined to take the first popular ground of difference, and to
resign upon it; and to take off the impression of having been baffled
by Ld. Sidmouth, it was determined that he should be instantly turned
out. Besides these reasons for the line taken upon this occasion by the
Cabinet, there were several who persistently indulged the hope that the
King would not be satisfied with this concession, but that he would
demand some further pledge on which they might make a stand on better
ground than they occupied at present. The event proved their sagacity.

_16th March_.--On Monday, 16th, Ld. Grenville went down to Windsor with
the Minute which had been agreed to on the day before in the Cabinet.
The K. required 24 hours to consider of his answer, and on Tuesday
morning he sent the following to Ld. Grenville:--

                                        17th March, Windsor Castle.

    ‘The King having fully considered what is submitted in the
    Minute of Cabinet which he received yesterday morning,
    desires Ld. G. will communicate to those who were present
    his sentiments and observations upon the contents of that
    Minute as hereafter explained.

    ‘His Majesty has learned with satisfaction that they have
    determined not to press forward any further the discussion
    of the Bill depending in Parlt., and he is sensible of the
    deference shown to his sentiments and feelings, but he
    regrets that while they have felt bound as his Ministers
    to adopt this line of conduct, they should as individuals
    consider it necessary to submit to Parlt. opinions which
    are known to be so decidedly contrary to his principles, at
    a moment too when it is the declared object of his Governt.
    not to encourage any disposition on the part of the R.
    Catholics of Ireland to prefer a Petition to Parliament.

[Sidenote: THE CATHOLIC QUESTION]

    ‘From the latter part of the Minute the K. must conclude,
    that altho’ the Bill which was depending is dropped, they
    have been unable to make up their minds not to press upon
    him in future measures connected with a question which
    has already proved so distressing to him, nor can H.M.
    conceal from them that this intimation on their part,
    unless withdrawn, will leave the matter in a state most
    embarrassing and unsatisfactory to him, and in his opinion
    not less to them. The K. therefore considers it due to
    himself and consistent with fair and upright conduct, which
    it has and ever will be his object to observe towards
    everyone, to declare at once most unequivocally that upon
    this subject his sentiments never can change, that he
    cannot ever agree to any concession which his confidential
    servants may in future propose to him; and that under these
    circumstances and after what has passed, his mind cannot be
    at ease unless he shall receive a positive assurance from
    them which shall effectually relieve him from all future
    apprehension.

                                                   ‘(Signed) GEORGE R.’

The preceding note was enclosed in the following:--

                                                  March 17th, 1807.

    ‘The King has lost no time in dictating the answer to the
    Minute of Cabinet. Ld. Grenville will receive it enclosed,
    and H.M. desires he will communicate it to his colleagues,
    trusting at the same time that Ld. Grenville will see the
    propriety, with a view to the prevention of all future
    mistakes, that when they shall have duly considered the
    latter part of His Majesty’s answer, their determination
    should be stated on paper.

                                               ‘(Signed) GEORGE R.’

When these notes were received by Ld. Grenville the Ministry were
in a very embarrassing situation, in consequence of having received
the night before Ld. Spencer’s resignation, which he sent to Ld.
Grenville the instant he was informed that the Bill in Parlt. was to
be abandoned, thinking himself particularly pledged to it, as being
the person through whom it had been communicated to the Irish Governt.
and to the Catholics that such a Bill was determined upon. The King’s
notes were therefore received with the greatest satisfaction, as
it enabled the whole of the Ministry, Ld. Sidmouth and his friends
excepted, to retire from office upon good and constitutional grounds,
while their offer to abandon the Bill exempted them from any charge of
having deceived or attempted to overreach the K. A respectful but firm
answer was therefore sent, refusing to give the pledge for their future
conduct which the King demanded.

_18th._--The answer of the Cabinet was given to the King this morning.
He is to take, as before, 24 hours to think of his reply.

He was to-day (Wednesday) very civil to Ld. Howick, hoped that if they
did part, they should part with a more favourable impression of each
other than they had entertained before they met. Assured him that he
had consulted with no one, not even with his own family, about forming
a new Administration.

The Prince takes part with his father on this the present question, and
he is full of complaints against Ministers for their conduct to him in
his difference with the Princess. Lady Hertford has great influence
with him at present, and she employs it. It is not many weeks since
that he offered to write a letter to Ld. Howick for the purpose of its
being shown to the Catholics, in which he would have pledged himself
to the Catholics, provided they remained quiet at present. Ld. Holland
did not encourage this measure, because as he had once broken his word
to the Catholics, it was supposed that a promise from him would have
little or no effect upon them. Ld. Moira is also extremely dissatisfied
with the greater part of his colleagues; he told Ld. H. two nights
ago that if this rupture had not taken place, he would have resigned
shortly, and that when they went out he should resign his Staff
appointments, and consider himself as no longer connected in party with
his present colleagues. He complained that since Mr. Fox’s illness no
one, except Ld. Holland, had treated him confidentially.[288]

[Sidenote: A NEW ADMINISTRATION]

Ld. H. this morning, through Ld. Granville Leveson, proposed a Cabinet
place _immediately_ to Canning if they should remain in office, or
return to it after a victory over the Court. Ld. G. Leveson received
the overtures thus made rather coldly. He seemed to think that Canning
would take the opposite side to Ld. Sidmouth, and in the evening he
seemed disturbed by a speech of Bragge’s,[289] who had said when
asked what part Ld. Sidmouth’s friends meant to take in the present
differences, ‘Why, stick by the King, to be sure.’ It is not known that
any person has as yet been sent for by the K. to consult with about a
new Administration.

_19th._--Letters from the D. of Bedford and Ld. Ponsonby. It seems that
the Catholics had been induced by the exertions of Ld. Ponsonby and
representations from the Castle, aided by the proof given by Ministers
of their unabated zeal in their cause by the clauses in the Mutiny
Bill, to abandon the intention of petitioning Parliament this session.
But when these letters were written, rumours had arrived of the
difficulties in carrying through the Mutiny Bill, and that Ministers
were suspected of an intention to give way upon that point.

Early to-day Lds. Eldon and Hawkesbury went to Windsor in consequence
of a message from the King communicated to them by ye D. of Cumberland.
In the course of the morning they called upon ye D. of Portland, with
the King’s commands to form a new Administration and to consult on that
subject with two of Mr. Pitt’s friends. Reports of the D. of Portland
declining to act on acct. of his infirmities; others again that he
declined acting if Ld. Melville was to be one of the Ministers, or if
it was resolved to dissolve Parlt. Ld. C. Spencer came from Burlington
House and reported them as being greatly alarmed. Ld. Hardwicke[290]
called in the evening at Ld. Grenville’s, and having inquired into the
truth of the pledge said to have been demanded by the King from his
Ministers, Ld. G. showed him the King’s note, on which Ld. Hardwicke
expressed himself perfectly satisfied with the conduct of Ministers
and thought they could not have acted otherwise with honour, and
that those who had advised the King to demand such a pledge were
impeachable. He concluded by assuring Ld. Grenville of his support and
of that of his brother, Mr. Yorke.[291] Wilberforce also called on Ld.
Grenville, and expressed much concern for what had happened, as well as
approbation of the conduct of Ministers.

It is said that with a view to shake the power of Ministers in order to
get rid of Windham, whom he detests, the D. of York had originally some
share in awakening his father’s scruples in the Catholic Bill. It is
also said that he now heartily repents of what he has done, and would
willingly assist to resettle matters. He justly fears a Ministry formed
of the friends of the Pss. of Wales. Both he and the Prince, who has,
but more strongly, the same fears, have offered to go down to Windsor
to endeavour to accommodate matters. The D. of Cumberland has availed
himself of the King’s insanity upon the C. Question to effect this
change. He read to him Perceval’s speech agst. the Catholics as the
sentiments of all good Protestants upon the subject, by which the K.
was exceedingly agitated, as he always is when the subject is discussed.

[Sidenote: CHANGE OF MINISTRY]

When the King returned to Windsor on Wednesday,[292] he was exceedingly
agitated, and after retiring for a short time alone, he desired
that Col. Taylor might be sent for immediately, and upon his coming
he dictated letters to Lds. Eldon and Hawkesbury. When Ld. Howick
arrived on Thursday evening, the King told him that it was but fair to
acknowledge that he parted with his present Ministers with regret,
that he had hesitated long before he resolved upon it, that it was
not till after re-perusing their communication and consulting with
his family that he had determined upon it. That he had never had the
slightest difference with them till now, and that it was only to get
rid of a sword constantly suspended over his head that he now resolved
to dismiss them from his service. All this was studiously told by the
King’s friends, and of course the sentiments are entitled to little or
no credit.

_20th._--The D. of Portland has consented to waive this objection
founded on the bad state of his health, provided any arrangement can
be devised which promises to last. They find great difficulties in
forming their arrangements. Mr. Yorke has said to Chas. Long that he
would take no part in their Administration, and that he disapproved
of their intention of forming one. Tierney reckons 220 Members in the
H. of Commons steady to the _late Ministers_, without including Ld.
Wellesley’s members, Ld. Carrington’s, Mr. Eden, the Saints, or the
Doctor’s.

_21st._--Ld. Hardwicke set off this morning to Windsor, and on his
return went to Burlington House.

Lds. Grenville, Howick, and Holland had a very long conference. Ld.
Grenville, averse to active measures; afraid ‘lest the tail should get
the better of the head.’ Ld. Howick is to write to the King, urging the
necessity of being prepared to explain the situation of Ministry in the
H. of C., if called upon on Monday.

Letters from Ireland yesterday and to-day. It appears that if they had
given up the Bill and remained in office, the D. of Bedford, Elliot,
(and _probably_) the Chancellor Ponsonby, would have resigned; and Ld.
Ponsonby, who has great influence over the Catholics, would have been
incensed and gone into Opposition. Charles Long told Ld. Lauderdale
that he had called upon him twice three days ago, to have talked over
the state of affairs, but it was now too late. Canning told Ld. Holland
that he doubted whether Ld. H. regretted more this break up than _he_
did!!! Ld. Spencer told the King on Wednesday last his determination to
resign if the Bill was abandoned.

Windham, in a sudden fit of disgust, told Ld. Grenville that he desired
he might no longer be considered as connected with _him_, as he
meant to attach himself to Lds. Howick and Holland solely. This rash
declaration was ill-timed, and nothing could be more ill-judged than
to do this at a moment when unanimity is so requisite, and when all
jealousies should be laid aside.

The event most to be feared at present is that the King should consent
to withdraw the _pledge_ he demands of them; and to accept their offer
to give up the Bill with the general reservation which accompanied that
offer. This would change the public ground on which they stand, and
very probably disunite them.

_22nd._--The Archbishop of Canterbury[293] is expressing everywhere
the most rapturous joy at what has taken place. He says, ‘It is the
_neatest_ done thing possible. Ministers have given up enough to
forfeit the confidence of the Catholics, and will not therefore have
the consolation of dying martyrs in the cause.’ ‘They have drawn their
own teeth and cannot bite.’

[Sidenote: CHANGE OF MINISTRY]

Ld. Hardwicke dined yesterday with Ld. Grenville. His visit yesterday
to Windsor was not in consequence of any message from the King, but
originating from himself in order to express to His Majesty his opinion
of the proposed alteration in his Governt. He arrived at Windsor
about the same time as Ld. Eldon, and as the K. was gone out, both had
some time to wait before they had an audience. The K. answered Ld.
Hardwicke’s arguments by saying it was a matter of conscience, and in
urging Ld. Hardwicke to take office he expressed great personal esteem
for him, and added, ‘I know the Yorkes are not given to cabals.’ Ld.
Westmoreland says this visit might have done some days ago, and served
the Ministry, but that now it is too late. The report in town was that
he was sent down by Ld. Grenville to accommodate matters.

Ld. Aberdeen says Ld. Melville is too infirm to accept offices; others
that he expects to be high in the Administration. Ld. Auckland has
written a very good letter to the King;[294] the worst, however, is
that he did this upon a former change, and his resignation is not that
of any office of emolument. His pension absorbs the salary of any place
he holds.

_23rd._--King’s answer to Ld. Howick gives him permission to state
to the House that he is employed in forming a new Administration.
Dickenson, the member for Somersetshire, is to put a question to Ld.
Howick this evening in order to lead to the explanation.

Dickenson did the business very ill, and so clumsily that he did no
good by his query. His questions were whether Ministers were still in
office, and whether the reports were true that they had attempted to
surprise the King’s conscience? Ld. Howick answered the 1st question,
but declined making any reply to the 2nd. A great attendance in the
House, but usual coldness manifested to a falling Ministry. Great
diversity of opinion as to the mode of conducting the Opposition. Ld.
Grenville, of course, hampered in consequence of the part he took in
1784. All resigned on March the 25th. The Prince acted shabbily; what
he called neutral.

The loss of all interest in public affairs was the natural effect of
the change of Administration to me. The Dissolution took place in May.
The elections turned out full as favourable as had been expected.
Bedfordshire was closely run between Fitzpatrick and Osborne, and
carried by a moderate majority. Yorkshire very triumphant in favour of
Ld. Milton;[295] Wilberforce accused and suspected of coalescing with
Lascelles, lost him greatly his popularity, and his shabby desertion
of the late Ministry.[296] A petition against Milton was ready, and
upon the point of being presented, but he judiciously procured one
also against Wilberforce, which, being held _in terrorem_, inclined
Wilberforce to exert and pledge himself on behalf of Ministers, who
came forward and promised to drop the petition against Ld. Milton, if
he in return would stipulate that the one against Wilberforce should be
dropped.

On ye 1st of May we went with all our family, excepting Mary,[297] to
Southampton. We lived in the Margravine’s house on the margin of the
water. The weather was remarkably fine, the scenery agreeable, and the
singularity of the arrangement of the houses and a terrace give it a
foreign air, which transported me in imagination to happier localities.

[Sidenote: SOUTHAMPTON]

The Cowpers[298] made us a visit of a week; the Kinnairds took a house
near to us and spent a fortnight. Lauderdale, Marsh, B. Frere, and Mr.
Horner made us a visit for a few days. We went over to Portsmouth to
take leave of Bartholomew, who was going with Sr. Arthur Paget[299]
to Constantinople. He brought with him Mr. Morier,[300] a sensible,
agreeable young man, who went in the capacity of interpreter; he is a
nephew of Ly. Radstock’s, his mother being a Smyrnese. Made several
excursions to Broadlands, the New Forest, and Titchfield Castle,
&c. The latter is remarkable for having been the birthplace of the
celebrated Ly. Russell; the last place in England where Charles I. took
refuge. It is in a ruinous state, but even in its decay retains strong
marks of its former splendour; the stables are spacious and grand.

Returned home about 17th June, 1807. Parliament very briskly attended;
scandalous retaliation of each party upon the score of jobbing.
Unfortunate Scotch business of Adam about Ld. Cullen.[301]

Ld. Granville Leveson set off upon his Embassy to Petersburg. An
expedition fitted out to the Baltic. Treaty of Tilsit arrived.

           *       *       *       *       *

After the delay of a fortnight, in consequence of my having a smart
bilious fever, we set off on the 22nd of August for our Scotch tour.
Our party consisted of ourselves, Charles, Mr. Allen, Marsh, Mr. Knapp,
Amelie, Aleck, Baptiste, Wm., Antonio. Being rather weak, the journeys
were to be short. The first night we slept at Dunstable. On Sunday went
through Northampton to Welford. The road remarkably good and handsome,
raised upon a _chaussée_, like the public roads in France, Italy, or
Spain.

On Monday passed through Leicester and Loughboro’ to Nottingham, where
we dined. It is a considerable town, well situated; the site of the
ancient castle is very striking, tho’ it is greatly destroyed by the
modern mansion which the bad taste of a Duke of Newcastle allowed to
be erected within the old walls.[302] The Trent is rather a large
river; the bridge we crossed was handsome and well built. Ld. H. called
upon the Mayor and Recorder; the Corporation are chiefly Dissenters,
and strongly attached to the Opposition. They testified their respect
for the memory of Mr. Fox by sending a deputation from the town of
Nottingham to walk at his funeral. In the evening we were overtaken by
a storm of thunder and lightning just upon the outskirts of Sherwood
Forest; I was terrified, and sought shelter in the house of a family of
the name of _Lowe_. We proceeded on to Mansfield, where we slept. On
Tuesday we set off at eleven, went about two miles out of the direct
road to see Hardwicke, the prison for many years of the unfortunate
Mary. The house in which she was confined is falling into ruins;
the present house was built by the celebrated Elizabeth, Countess of
Shrewsbury, after Mary had been withdrawn from her custody.

The road to Chesterfield is pretty. Sheffield was full as dirty and
offensive as before. Slept at Penistone, a small village and bad
inn quite out of the high road. Got out and looked at the Castle of
Skipton, a valuable estate annexed to which belongs to Thanet. Got late
in the evening to Lowood Inn, by the side of Windermere. I was not well
in the night.

[Sidenote: WORDSWORTH]

_Wednesday._--Sent an invitation to Wordsworth, one of the Lake poets,
to come and dine, or visit us in the evening. He came. He is much
superior to his writings, and his conversation is even beyond his
abilities. I should almost fear he is disposed to apply his talents
more towards making himself a _vigorous conversationist_ in the style
of our friend Sharp,[303] than to improve his style of composition.
He is preparing a manual to guide travellers in their tour amongst
the Lakes. He holds some opinions on picturesque subjects with which
I completely differ, especially as to the effects produced by _white_
houses on the sides of the hills; to my taste they produce a cheerful
effect. He, on the contrary, would brown, or even black-work them; he
maintained his opinion with a considerable degree of ingenuity. His
objection was chiefly grounded upon the distances being confounded by
the glare of white. He seems well read in his provincial history.

On Thursday, after stopping to see a very feeble cascade at Sr. Daniel
Le Fleming’s, we reached Keswick to dinner. We found Southey, who had
accepted our invitation. He is full of genius and poetical enthusiasm.
His _History of Portugal_ is suspended in order that he may publish,
by way of prefatory discourse, a _Life of the Cid_, which he is
translating from an old Chronicle, and unfortunately into the style
and language of the Bible. He has already made that experiment in his
translation of _Amadis de Gaul_, and of his _History of Portugal_; to
suit the curiosity of the day, he is going to publish the colonial part
first.[304] This may be profitable, and the spirit of it obtained him
from Whishaw the name of ‘Voulgar Tradesman.’ In the evening we visited
his family; I was curious to see his interior. His house is excellent
and beautifully situated. He seems much beloved by a numerous domestic
circle of connections and friends; he is surrounded by heaps of old and
valuable Spanish books.

On Friday we set off to profit by the hospitality of Ld. Thanet, who
offered us the comfort and repose of Appleby. We passed by Ullswater,
but only saw the upper part of the Lake, which, from all accounts, is
very inferior in beauty to the view a few miles lower. From Pooley
Bridge we drove through a very fine country to Appleby. On our road we
got out to see Brougham Hall, a very beautiful place belonging to Mr.
Brougham’s father. The view from the terrace is quite magnificent; the
family have not inhabited the house for many years, and it is falling
fast into decay.

[Sidenote: APPLEBY CASTLE]

Appleby is placed in a commanding situation above the town; a pretty
torrent rushes beneath the walls. The old Keep or Citadel was, till
within these few years, used as the prison. Ld. Thanet is Hereditary
Sheriff of the County. The present mansion is built out of the
old Castle, or rather made within its walls. This was done by the
celebrated Ann Clifford, the heiress and representative of the Earls
of Cumberland; her daughter married a Tufton, and thus brought these
immense northern estates into the present family. She wrote the famous
letter, in reply to the solicitation of a Minister of Charles II. or
James, to allow a Court member to stand for Appleby, ‘I have been
threatened by a usurper, neglected by a Court, but will not be bullied
by a subject; your man shall _not_ stand.’

Mr. Wyburgh, a lawyer of eminence, was in the Castle; he was employed
on an election arbitration between Ld. Lowther and Thanet, upon the
number of votes in Appleby.

    Visiting Naworth Castle, where ‘Lord Carlisle occasionally
    comes for a fortnight in the shooting season,’ the party
    entered Scotland, and passing Longtown, Moffat, and Lanark,
    reached Hamilton. ‘The Palace is reckoned gloomy. The
    present Duke has augmented the collection of pictures, but
    the Rubens and Vandyke still maintain their posts as the
    first....’

_8th._--Got to Dumbarton. Slept at Aroquhar; a good inn, well situated
upon a salt loch; it was very beautiful, but we could not admire it
after having spent the day by the side of Loch Lomond, so in a storm
of hail, rain, wind, and sleet, and snow falling upon the mountains,
we reached Inverary. The Duke[305] is in perfect health; the inmates
there, the Bedfords, Ld. John[306] and Mr. Hunt, the T. Sheridans,
E. Bligh, Lewis, Chester, Cornewall, H. Scott. At difft. times, Ld.
Ely, Downshire, Messrs. Reid, Ld. John Campbell, Mr. Campbell, Col.
Callander, McDonald, and Clanronald, and others whom I have forgotten.
The house has undergone great alterations; the upper floor is entirely
new furnished. To enliven the scene the high road is brought close to
the windows. Upon the whole it is a most princely domain, and the Duke
is a noble Chieftain. The only objection to the mode of life is the
extraordinary lateness of the hours, and the consequent inability of
doing anything; some wags have called it the Castle of Indolence. As
late as half past seven in the morning, I have heard the billiards at
work by T. Sheridan and Mr. Chester.[307]

    After a tour along Loch Tay to Blair Atholl, they turned
    south to Perth, visited Brechin Castle and Dundee, and
    reached Edinburgh on October 6.

During our stay there we saw much of Messrs. Playfair, Jeffrey,
Brougham, Murray, Dr. Cameron the Catholic Bishop (late Principal of
the Scotch College at Valladolid), a very able man, Thompsons, &c., &c.
Lauderdale came over to see us; the Bedfords for a short time.

Slept three nights at Dunbar House, and went from thence to Howick,
staying several days. Through York to Castle Howard; stayed three
nights. Marsh remained there; and by the way of Newark to Nottingham,
where Ld. H. received the Freedom of ye City, and we went by Leicester
to meet, at Hinckley, Henry E.,[308] whom Miss Fox brought us from
St. Anne’s. We there consulted with Chesher, a famous mechanician for
instruments; he measured the limb, and gave us hopes that he could
contrive an instrument to assist his walking. From Hinckley we went
through Litchfield to Trentham Hall, where we stayed a few days;
returned through Hinckley to Woburn Abbey. We there spent upwards of a
week most agreeably. Returned home, Nov. 24th, 1807.

[Sidenote: HENRY EDWARD FOX]

_Dec. 12th._--Mr. Allen accompanied Henry E. to Hinckley, where he was
to reside with Ld. Robt. Fitzgerald, and under his protection.

On 31st Dec. went without Mr. Allen, who was employed busily at home,
for a few days to Brocket. We there heard of the measles having
appeared in Ld. Robt.’s family, and set off to Hinckley to remove Henry
E., if possible, in time. We slept at Woburn one night on our way in
going, two at Ampthill, and one more at Woburn on our return. Henry E.
did not escape the measles, but is now recovering.

_January 1808, H. House._--Sr. Arthur Paget returned last month from
his unsuccessful Embassy. For seven months he only slept one night on
land. He never approached nearer the Porte than the small Island of
Imbros. B. Frere returned with him. He sent Mr. Morier to Egypt.

The choice of G. Ponsonby for a Leader to the Opposition has been more
approved, or, rather, to speak more correctly, less objected to than
might have been expected.[309] The public laugh at the having sent to
Ireland for a leader; Fox’s friends are indifferent since his death.
Petty is reasonable as usual, and Whitbread, goaded by a scribbling
gazetteer of the name of Belsham,[310] submits with a thousand
reservations each more hostile than the other. Tom Grenville absolutely
declined, on the score of health alone; he is in fact far from a
robust subject, and quite unfit to undergo the fatigues of a long
debate. Sheridan’s talents would entitle him to the first rank, but his
profligacy of character, both as to veracity and honesty, besides his
habitual debauchery, place him entirely _hors de combat_.

Ld. Granville Leveson is just returned from Petersburg; another
fruitless Mission! He describes the Emperor as being totally subjugated
by Bonaparte, and even trembling before his representative, General
Savary, who assumes the air of a master in Russia.[311] From the little
I have heard, he seems to me to be entirely belonging to the present
Governt.

On Monday, the 17th, we took Charles to Eton. He is now launched into
the sea of human affairs; the _world_ of a public school he will find
very different from that of the world seen from under the paternal roof.

[Sidenote: WAR BY COMPULSION]

On ye 16th, the chief persons of ye Opposition dined at Ld.
Grenville’s; Whitbread was not originally invited, but was so, at the
particular request of Ld. Grey. Stahremberg[312] sent the whole of the
correspondence between him and the Governt. which ended in the present
rupture between them and his Court. Mr. Canning seems to have rejected
the mediation of Austria in very unbecoming terms, and in his usual
flippant manner; the whole will be made public. S.’s instructions are
peremptory as to his quitting England before the meeting of Parlt.
Bonaparte offered passports for _two_ plenipos., hoped they would
select men of ‘_formes simples_’ and of a ‘_caractère impassible_’; a
glance against either Lds. Lauderdale or Malmesbury. S., in his private
letters to Metternich, complained of Mr. Canning’s impetuosity, and
misapprehension of several expressions. Whitbread, with malignity and
in the most unprovoked manner, attacked Ld. Grey at dinner; all were
disgusted at his rancorous spirit. It was unfortunate that such a
wrangle should occur before Ld. Grenville upon the subject of peace, as
he had only just been persuaded against seceding himself from the H. of
Lords upon the precise subject of the question of peace, and the want
of discipline and unanimity amongst the difft. parts of the Opposition.

_18th._--Ld. H. dined at Ld. Stafford’s. We went to the Birthday.

_19th._--The same party dined here as did at Ld. Grenville’s, with the
addition of a few, and Ld. Erskine, _nommément_ to prevent a recurrence
of the unpleasant conversation between Whitbread and Grey.

I hear nothing but of Coleridge, which makes me regret not being
acquainted with him. After having accepted, by way of recompense for
three scurrilous letters against Mr. Fox which appeared in the _Morning
Post_ upon his residence at Paris, a Commissaryship at Malta, he is
returned to England, where he is supposed to employ himself in writing
articles in the _Courier_.[313] His nature is radically bad; he hates
and envies all that are good and celebrated, and to gratify that spleen
he has given in to Methodism, not from conviction, but solely to
enable him to give vent to his malignity in a garb which is a _passe
partout_. He is fond of maintaining paradoxes; at a dinner lately he
began by attacking Sir Isaac Newton’s philosophy, Bonaparte’s military
talents, and Virgil as a poet. He is often obscure, a mystical species
of platonic philosophy, which he dresses up according to his own
metaphysical taste, and calls the _mind_. A new theory he descants upon
at length, and in his exposition of it absorbs the whole conversation.
I have heard of him from various persons; Campbell, the poet, furnished
me with the latter particulars.

[Sidenote: OPENING OF PARLIAMENT]

The debate on the Address went off very triumphantly for the Opposition
in the Lords, and, as far as the negative success of the failure of
Ministers in making an impression, did so in the Commons. Ld. Grenville
made a masterly speech in which he pressed strongly the atrocity of
the Copenhagen business, the impolicy of their conduct with regard to
the U. States, rather depreciated the prospect of the advantages of
the emigration of the Portuguese to _Brésil_, and touched lightly upon
peace. The novelty of the night was Ld. Kenyon,[314] who did not acquit
himself _formidably_. Some considered Mr. G. Ponsonby’s speech as a
complete failure, but more temperate judges say it was not so, and the
accident of not moving the Amendment arose from a misapprehension of
more protests than his alone. Mr. Canning appears to have assumed the
lead, and by an endeavour to appear dignified he was heavy and obscure,
instead of being, as formerly, pretty flippant. Perceval excelled him
much, but the fair ones allow there was not a good speech made in the
whole debate. Mr. C. professed that Governt. had laid down a rule,
which was to act directly contrary to what they found had been the
conduct of their predecessors, and hitherto they had not erred.

On Monday, the 1st of Feb., we moved to Pall Mall. I had been confined
many days with a smart inflammation in my eyes.

On Wednesday, 3rd Feb., a long debate in the Commons on Mr. Ponsonby’s
motion for further papers on the Danish Expedition.[315] Altho’ he had
spoken before, yet this was considered as a debut; his friends were
rather anxious, as his forte lies more in reply than in the opening
of a business. However, he acquitted himself well, and people seem to
be generally satisfied with him. He was answered by Mr. Canning in a
speech remarkable chiefly from its length, and the abundance of gross
untruths; he read extracts out of those very despatches he refused to
give to the House, and in one instance (a dispatch of Ld. Howick’s
to Mr. Garlike) read a sentence which, if he had read the context,
would have given a different colour to the whole matter. He was very
flippant and offensive, and showed neither more nor less ability than
usual. Mr. Mills[316] [_sic_], his _élève_, was quite extinguished;
it was the first occasion on which he had attempted to speak without
previously writing his speech, so he is completely given up by all and
laughed at by his own party. Ld. Palmerston’s maiden speech was not
attended either with the bad or good qualities of a young beginner; he
had practised in debating societies, and formed an unimpressive, bad
manner. Some of Opposition who are for the expedition yet voted upon
this question, but would not if it had been a vote against the Ministry
for that measure. Upon the whole the effect of the debate was rather
against Opposition.

Sick of, and indifferent to the measures of a hopeless Opposition, I
have omitted noticing any occurrence.

           *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: SOLANO’S DEATH]

_July 1808._--Mr. Campbell, whom we knew at Madrid, returned from
Spain with the Deputies from Seville.[317] He remained at Cadiz
during the disturbances, surrender of the French fleet, and murder
of Solano.[318] The conduct of Solano he ascribed to the greatest
infatuation, proceeding from a blind confidence in O’Farrill.[319] The
leading people at and about Cadiz, as soon as Murat’s massacre[320]
on the 2nd of May was known, urged Solano to hoist the Spanish flag
alone, and summon the French fleet to surrender to the Spaniards. He
temporised; he was at length threatened that unless he did something
decisive against the French by the ensuing day, his life should answer
for his conduct. The people showed great symptoms of discontent, called
him _embustero_, &c. Amongst the mob many persons supposed of eminence
were in disguise. During this period of hesitation on his part, young
Perico Giron (whom we knew intimately at Madrid) escaped, upon hearing
the events at Madrid, from his regiment at Badajoz, and arrived at
Cadiz and challenged Solano. But no duel took place, for the fatal day
came when the people assembled tumultuously around his house, called
for him to appear and justify his inaction, none of the measures
required by the inhabitants having been adopted. He appeared upon his
balcony. The sight of him seemed to incense the mob; they attempted
to force the entrance of the house, the gateways were barricaded.
Upon seeing their fury, he got through the roof of his own house, and
gained admittance into that of Mr. Strange (an Irish wine merchant),
where he was concealed in a hiding-place so effectually that the mob,
after searching, as they imagined, every place, were going off, when
unfortunately a man, who had been employed only 14 days before to paint
over a panel in order to cover a hiding-place, betrayed the concealment
and discovered Solano. He made no resistance; the people hurried him to
the place of execution. In going thither, some person said he ought to
have a priest, upon which Solano said that it was unnecessary, as he
had nothing to confess; this he frequently repeated, till at length
the mob lost all restraint, and upwards of fifty bayonets were plunged
into his body, and his corpse was hacked and mutilated shockingly in a
moment.

As soon as this disgraceful act of cruelty was over, the necessity of
having some Governt. was felt, and it was agreed almost by acclamation
that Morla, Don Thomas Morla, who had formerly been the Captain-General
of Andalusia, and had distinguished himself by the prompt and decisive
measures which he had taken to prevent the progress of the yellow
fever, was the best fitted to fill the station now vacant. Morla, it
was supposed, had not entirely made up his mind as to the side he
should take, and that, like Solano, he waited for Dupont’s[321] army.
However, he had no choice, and accepted with reluctance the honour. He
harangued the people with great ability and fortitude, assured them
that if he undertook the charge he would fulfil it rigidly; that they
knew him to be inflexible, nor should he depart from what he thought
his duty, notwithstanding the dreadful spectacle he had just beheld.
He gave an immediate proof of his cleverness and dexterity; during the
tumult, about eight hundred of the _Presidarios_, galley-slaves, broke
into the Arsenal, armed themselves and others. Morla was aware of the
danger, and also of the impolicy of allowing such men to bear arms, and
resolved upon disarming them instantly. He ordered processions to be
made through the streets of the Capucins and other Franciscan friars,
who were to chant hymns and prayers requesting the citizens to lay down
their arms. By night almost all the inhabitants had deposited their
arms at the feet of the friars.

[Sidenote: DUKE OF INFANTADO]

I was pleased to find such a favourable opinion prevailed with regard
to the Duke of Infantado.[322] He had been exiled from his own estates,
and lived at San Lucar, where he had acquired the esteem and confidence
of all who saw him. Thus his conduct at Bayonne is conceived to arise
entirely from compulsion. He was dismissed the Court in consequence
of that affair at the Escorial in which he was involved, as there was
a paper found in his possession signed by the Prince of the Asturias,
nominating him as President of Castille, in which capacity he would
have had the governt. of the country. The Prince contended that this
instrument could have had no power but after his mother’s death, in
proof of which he alleged that the seal was affixed upon black wax, and
it was only to obviate the danger that might have arisen in the country
should his mother and the Prince of the Peace have been able to shut
him up and attempt an exclusion or Regency.

We went in July to Woburn; Mr. Brougham was with us. Our party
consisted of Lauderdale, D. of Argyle, W. Elliot, Adam, etc. Extremely
pleasant place, both grand and comfortable, and the park very pretty
in some parts. Went over to see Luton, belonging to Ld. Bute. The
house was built by his father, the Minister, and does no credit to his
choice of an architect, the Adams. The collection of pictures is very
numerous, the Flemish and Dutch schools are the finest, altho’ amongst
the great number of Italian pictures some are good. The most remarkable
portraits are those grouped with some malicious skill by Sr. Joshua.
They are those of Ld. Bute and his Secretary, Jenkinson, now Ld.
Liverpool.[323] The Prime Minister is represented with all the pomp and
dignity of office, a splendid dress and commanding air; he is taking,
rather than receiving, from his Secretary a bundle of papers, which
the Secretary, with a most submissive air, is holding in his hands.
The story tells itself,--the Duke of Lerma and Gil Blas; the abject,
fawning, sly Secretary, and the haughty great man. People say Sr.
Joshua Reynolds marked the characters so strongly in order to stamp the
origin of a man, whose sneaking qualities he foresaw would raise him
to distinction. Ld. Liverpool, I have been assured, offered frequently
a very large sum to withdraw from the eye of the public this memorial.
The Library is very extensive, and the three rooms which join it are
handsome, altho’ it might have been infinitely better.

[Sidenote: WILLIAM BELSHAM]

We went to Hinckley to see Henry E., who had been there about a month
with his aunt; his limb is not worse. From thence for one night to
Farming Woods, belonging to Ld. Ossory; charming spot, fine trees,
abundance of deer, and wild woodland scenery. Slept at Bromham,
Mr. Trevor’s, a pretty water place on the banks of the Ouse. From
thence for three nights to Mr. Whitbread’s at Southill. Ly. Madelina
Palmer[324] was there. With the exception of the Trevors for one
day, the rest of the company was _remplissage_ of the very worst
sort, fulsome flatterers, and disgusting dependents. Mr. Belsham, the
gazetteer or pamphleteer, who calls his heavy compilation a History of
England, was one of them; his manners and appearance are positively
offensive to all the senses. He extols Whitbread to the skies, and
makes him believe no man can serve the country with equal talents and
honesty, and that nothing but Ld. Grey’s envy at his superiority could
have kept him out of the highest offices in the late Administration.
He has composed a virulent libel against the late Governt., which he
circulates about the country, and boasts of his forbearance, that out
of consideration to Mr. Whitbread’s _affection_ for Ld. Grey that he
does not publish it. It is particularly offensive to Grey, and the
subject most urged is the failure of the negotiation. Mr. W. has an
unfortunate relish for the society he indulges in at Southill.

Returned on Thursday, 11th August. On ye 19th August news arrived
officially from Ld. Collingwood of Dupont’s surrender to Castaños in
Andalusia.[325]

_16th August._ The Spanish Deputies dined here. They are five in all,
viz., Visconde de Matarosa[326] and Don Andres de la Vega (these
were the first, who came from the Junta of Oviedo). The Visconde is
a very young man, not above 19; la Vega is a sensible, well-informed
man, esteemed by his countryman Jovellanos. Sangro is the Deputy from
Galicia; he had been named to go to Bayonne, but escaped and was sent
with another, Freyne,[327] who has since returned to Coruña with
arms, &c., &c. The Sevillian Deputies are Jacome and Apodaca. Jacome
is a member of the Junta at Seville. The latter is the admiral who
commanded these last two years at Cadiz, and to whom the French fleet
surrendered. He is very lively and pleasing in his manners, and of the
whole mission he is the one who has the most _usage du monde_.

He ascribes the misfortune of Solano to the machinations of a faction
actuated by personal hatred. Had Solano complied with the demands of
the mob, the consequence would have been the complete destruction of
their own fleet, as at that moment the ships were so intermingled that
the French could have sunk the Spaniards. Apodaca seemed satisfied
with himself for his dexterity in getting out the Spaniards and not
endangering them. They were in great spirits at the surrender of
Dupont, and also at the news of the evacuation of Madrid. It appears
that Joseph Bonaparte withdrew from thence on ye 29th, after staying
only 3 days in _his_ Capital, rather hastily, with the spoils and
plunder of the palaces. He is at Segovia, with a force of 23,000,
waiting orders from Napoleon. Moncey and his shattered Valencian army
are with him. Mr. Vaughan writes from Coruña that Mr. Stuart (who was
formerly at Petersburg) was received with great demonstrations of
regard and friendship; the officers, naval and military, had shown him
Ferrol, and as he returned the villages were illuminated. They had
heard of Sr. A. Wellesley’s landing at the mouth of the Mondego, the
river so praised by Camoens.

We left home on Sunday, August 22nd, for this place Boundes, Ld. Hy.
Petty’s. Made an excursion from thence along the coast from Hastings to
Brighton; passed a few days at Mr. Beauclerk’s, and returned home, 1st
September.

    At the end of October the Hollands set out for Spain, and
    did not return until the following August. Lady Holland
    continued to keep a detailed account of their travels and
    the information which reached them concerning the movements
    of the opposing forces in Spain and the progress of the
    war. This portion of her Journal, however, is omitted.

On August 12th, 1809, reached Holland House, where we found the
children and my mother perfectly well. The Pettys and Beauclerks and
many of our friends came from the country to see us, and stayed a few
days in the house.

[Sidenote: LORD LANSDOWNE’S DEATH]

_22nd Nov._--It is too distant from this present period to make a
review of all the occurrences from that time to this. Mr. Canning and
Ld. Castlereagh fought on 21st Sept. Ld. Wellesley has accepted his
recall,[328] and is daily expected; many believe he is coming upon
the misapprehension that the Premiership has been offered to him.
Lord Lansdowne[329] died on 14th Nov., which event is fatal to the
Opposition by removing Petty from the H. of Commons. He has endeavoured
to annoy Petty by his will and much disrespect for his father’s family,
by making the remainder over to Ld. Winchilsea, and then to Ly.
Lansdowne and her 2nd daughter.[330] To the latter, they say, a lease
for 21 years is granted of L. H.

On 7th Nov. I was brought to bed of a daughter.[331]

Tuesday, 21st Nov., 1809, Ld. H. on this day completed his thirty-six
years. He dined at Ld. Winchilsea’s.[332] Mr. Allen and I alone. He
read in eve. Berington’s _Life of Henry II._, a work not without
merit, tho’ the language is frequently barbarous.[333] The character
of Becket is well drawn, and from his close researches into monkish
chronicles he gives many interesting anecdotes which throw light upon
the manners and mode of life in those times. He is a Roman Catholic
priest, and tho’ one sees a bias, yet he has more liberality than
usual with persons of his class. Indeed, at Rome he was suspected of
giving up the cause of the Church too much: accordingly for some time
he was suspended from his clerical functions by a papal mandate. He
is also the author of a life of _Abelard and Eloïsa_, and possesses
in manuscript, which he dare not publish, a history of the revival of
learning.

Mr. Canning wrote to Ld. G. Leveson: ‘Lord Chuckle [_sic_] is, I
hear, sufficiently recovered to take his prescription; accordingly, I
shall send my letter to-morrow, and the other shall go abroad the day
following.’ So we may expect to-morrow to see this long announced and
much looked-for _second_ statement.[334]

Henry and his tutor, Mr. Shuttleworth, left us on Sunday for Hinckley.

_Wednesday, 22nd._--Mr. Tierney, Mr. Grenville, and Ld. Darnley dined.

_Thursday, 23rd Nov._--Ministerial papers announce very triumphantly
that Ld. Wellesley has accepted the office offered to him by them, and
is to come home immediately and fill his place.

Ly. Eliz.[335] came, the first time I have seen her since her marriage
with Duke of Devonshire; I could not utter a congratulation upon the
occasion. The Lambs, Mr. Windham, S. Lockington, Sr. Robt. Wilson, Mr.
Stuart, Duke of Argyle, Ld. Robt. FitzGerald, Ly. Affleck dined.

Mr. C.’s statement is not yet out. My mother returned from Gosport with
Charles, whom she had been to see on acct. of his illness.

_Friday, 24th Nov._--Ld. Wellesley has written to Mr. Canning assigning
his reasons for accepting, but what they are I know not.

[Sidenote: PANSHANGER]

_14th Dec., 1809._--The Whig Corporation of Nottingham having done
Ld. H. the honour of choosing him their Recorder, vacant by the death
of the D. of Portland, it was necessary for him to go there and take
the oaths. Accordingly we took the opportunity of making the journey
in part with him, and of paying some visits on our way, for change of
air for me after a confinement is indispensable to keep off a whole
train of nervous disorders, and I did not much relish the notion of
a trip to Nottingham to share his civic honours. On this day we went
to _Panshanger_, on the _banks of the Mimram_, a very Asiatic sound!
A pretty place of Lord Cowper’s in Hertfordshire. We took Tierney
with us. Found besides the family, Lds. Essex, Erskine, and Mr. Giles
Lewis. No news of the result of the election at Oxford,[336] but the
Grenvilles began to despond.

Drove out to see the new college at Haileybury, a large, ugly,
mean-looking conventual building. In the eve, news came of Lord
Grenville’s success at Oxford; carried it by a majority of 13.

_15th._--Drove to Woolmers, a dismal, damp, ill-kept house, belonging
to Ld. Stafford. It was too cold to walk to the spring, and, indeed, I
am too lame to undertake any excursion on foot.

_16th, Sunday._--We were to have gone away, but delayed our departure
in order to see Ly. Melbourne, who was coming on the ensuing day.

_17th._--Ly. Melbourne came.

_18th, Tuesday._--Set off and resolved to go as far as we could, as Ld.
H. was to be at Nottingham to a great dinner on Wednesday. The roads
were in a very bad condition owing to the great fall of rain; however,
we reached Stamford and slept.

_19th._--Ld. H. set off alone to Nottingham. Mr. Allen, Charles, and I
went to see Burleigh, a stately edifice, not improved by the bad taste
of the last proprietor. A few good pictures, and several beautiful
portraits of Mde. de la Vallière after her profession, in the dress
of the Order. Ascertained that the story of Ld. Exeter having made a
bonfire, in the courtyard, of Voltaire, Rousseau, &c., was true. This
was done to edify the people at Stamford during the _alarm_, to teach
them to shun the doctrines of those apostates from religion, morality,
&c. From thence we went to Grantham, where I resolved to take up my
abode till Ld. H. returned.

_20th._--Went to see Belvoir, which is undergoing a thorough reparation
and improvement by Wyatt. It commands a staring, ugly view of the Vale
of Belvoir. The antique baronial costume of the castle is destroyed
by the introduction of modern fortifications and of artillery mounted
upon the walls. The collection of pictures is very good. The famous
‘Sacraments’ of _Poussin_, and a pretty _Murillo_ with three Virgins
in white, exactly in the style of those in the famous ‘Transito de
Santa Clara,’ in the convent at Seville. We sent for _novels_ to the
circulating library, and sat up reading the trash it furnished half the
night.

_21st._--Ld. H. returned pleased with the reception he had met with
from his fellow Burgesses, and we got on to Stilton, a bad, dismal inn.

[Sidenote: CAMBRIDGE]

_22nd._--We went to Cambridge, to show Mr. A. the colleges, &c. Got
there by daylight. Dr. Davy,[337] the Master of Caius College, made
us dine with him; a good-natured, trifling, insignificant man. Lord
Percy, Dukes of Rutland and Gloster are to be the candidates for the
Chancellorship, whenever the D. of Grafton will die and give them an
opportunity of trying their popularity.

_23rd._--A fall of snow which rendered the walking across the
Quadrangle unpleasant. The Library at Trinity is very handsome, but
the books are the least to be praised in it. A good bust of Newton.
The chapel contains a statue of Newton; the countenance is full of
expression and genius, but the sculpture is very moderate, altho’
considered by them as a _chef-d’œuvre_. Went to the chapel of King’s
College. Glad that my recollection of Batalha was so fresh that it
enabled me to compare the architectural styles and beauties. That of
Batalha[338] is generally superior in execution, the taste of King’s
chapel perhaps is more chaste and simple, but it does not possess one
specimen of exquisite delicacy of sculpture; the roses and portcullis
are coarsely carved.

Passed through Eaton and Bedford. Reached Ampthill to a late dinner.
Waters very much out.

_24th, Ampthill._--Ld. Ossory as usual kind and very pleasant. Capt.
Waldegrave, a cousin, and son of Lady Waldegrave. Our old shipmate, Sr.
John Sinclair, Dr. Hunt, &c. A contagious fever at Southill prevents
our visit; Lady Elizabeth ill. Mr. Whitbread came over to see us,
much offended and irritated at the anonymous circular; ascribes all as
intended offences from Grey and Tierney to _him_. Reached Brocket on
the 27th.

_28th, Brocket._--Large family party with the addition of Messrs,
Luttrell and Nugent. Ld. Kinnaird dined one day, grave, good-humoured,
and agreeable; his illness has subdued and softened his naturally
irritable character. We were to have set off again on the 1st January
for Woburn, but I was seized with such a severe headache that I was
compelled to return to my bed; sent an excuse for that day to the D. of
B. by Aleck, who was to meet us at St. Albans on the following day.

_Monday, 2nd January, 1810._--Very much alarmed at the account brought
by Aleck of Charles having met with a severe fall. Contrary to a
promise given me by Lady Anne (and his uncle),[339] she allowed him to
go out with her to a fox chase. He cut the inside of his leg between
ham and knee dreadfully. Reached Woburn late, and after a hasty dinner
Mr. A. and I set off to see Charles; found him with fever. Went again
next day to see the wound; found it a most dreadful gash, as bad as
anything can be which has not touched a vital part, and may not perhaps
do him a permanent injury.

_Sunday, 7th._--Ld. H. was so much pressed to go to town that he went
to see Lds. Grey and Grenville, and dined at Mr. Grenville’s. Duke of
B. went next day and returned to dinner, bringing Lord Holland down
with him. Ld. Kinnaird, Mr. Chester, Delmé Gunning, Morrice, General
Fitzpatrick, Tavistocks, &c., compose off and on the party.

_10th Jan._--We this day brought Charles over from Ampthill, who bore
the motion of the carriage tolerably. He will oblige us to defer going
away much longer than we intended to be absent from home.

[Sidenote: DEBATE ON THE ADDRESS]

Left Woburn on ----. Stayed at H.H. until Monday, 22nd Jan., the eve
of the meeting of Parlt., and on that day took possession of our
former dirty habitation in Pall Mall. On 23rd there were very sanguine
expectations entertained of not only a good division, but even of a
majority of 13 in the Commons, it being confidently asserted that many
of the stoutest adherents of the former Ministry would keep away, such
as the Lascelles’, Pagets, Ld. Newark, &c. However, every one of these
came up, and after a flat debate the majority was all on the wrong
side. Numbers, 167 to 263.[340]

Mr. Ward made a brilliant display, and all the young gentlemen, movers
and seconders, acquitted themselves with propriety. Mr. Canning voted
for the Address in a bad, blundering speech, in which he did not
redeem the pledge he had made of justifying himself in his place in
Parlt. It was rather a whimsical coincidence that Ld. G. Leveson could
not vote, not being _in time_ to take his seat. This is the third
time in his Parliamentary life that he has been baffled in voting
upon dubious occasions however. In the Lords the attempt to stir Ld.
Wellesley failed. Lord Grey’s speech was a most finished oration. The
division was great, 92; numbers which would formerly have broken up any
Administration.[341]

On Friday Lord Porchester’s motion of inquiry into the Walcheren
expedition was most unexpectedly carried by a majority of 9 against
Ministers.[342] Wilberforce behaved in the most flagrant but sanctified
manner; he deserted his friend Perceval at the critical pinch. Mr.
Ponsonby is recovering his reputation; he made a sharp, sarcastic
speech which produced a considerable effect and reconciled those who
had _snouched_ most at him. Mr. Canning acted against inquiry, and
upon observing to Ld. Temple that he (Ld. Temple) was in a majority,
was answered, ‘Yes, and the best part of it is that it was without yr.
assistance.’ Ld. Castlereagh, whose manly conduct and being considered
as an injured man by the House has conciliated him much public esteem,
voted for the inquiry.

Ld. Wellesley made his debut in the character of Minister upon the
thanks of the House being moved to Ld. Wellington. Some commend, and
others disparage his speech; perhaps the middle line of praise would be
nearest the truth. He was rather oriental in his style of praising his
brother, but much may be owing to his feelings upon such a subject as
that of his brother’s merits undergoing a slighting review.

Poor Hoppner, the painter, is dead. Public attention and sympathy has
been fixed by the sudden and mysterious disappearance of Mr. Eden,[343]
who left his father’s house in Old Palace Yard on Friday eve., having
previously told his servant he should return in an hour, and from that
time to this, an interval of ten days has elapsed without any tidings.
A man was seen on that Friday, at 9 o’clock, scrambling upon the ice on
the Thames, who, upon being called upon to stop, rushed on and plunged
into the stream. Poor young man, he was to all appearance the last
person in the world likely to lay violent hands upon himself.

_Sunday, 28th Jan., 1810, Pall Mall._--A belief afloat that Prince
Stahremberg is the bearer of an offer of peace from Ld. Wellesley to
Napoleon. He went yesterday to Paris.

Lds. Thanet, Erskine, Sr. Philip Francis, and Don Domingo de Souza[344]
dined.

           *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: WINDHAM’S WILL]

_June, 1810._--It appears that Windham from the period of his leaving
College had kept a diary; the last entry was on the day the operation
was decided.[345] He says: ‘This day sentence has been passed upon
me,’ It fills 15 vols. in 4to., and according to his will is annexed
as an heirloom to the proprietor of Fellbrigge; so in case of failure
of issue in Capt. Lukin, it will fall into the hands of the Egremont
family. A curious instance of weakness in Windham, and one that
probably never would have been drawn forth, but for the feelings
stirred up by the French Revolution: he has put Lord Egremont into the
entail of his estate, treating him as a relation. During his life the
relationship was never claimed, and certainly not admitted, either
by him or by Ld. Egremont; the mode of spelling the name is quite
different. He left six thousand pr. ann., at least, to his wife, who
has most indecorously exposed to public sale all his books and common
pamphlets; the latter especially are scribbled over entirely with
his own observations on the margin. These have been bought up by the
booksellers, and will hereafter be sold as immensely valuable from
possessing his notes. There is a pamphlet of Sr. S. Romilly’s upon the
state of Criminal Law, which is entirely written over by W.; and the
strictures intended merely for himself to reply to in the H. of Commons
are most likely not calculated to please Romilly, or indeed could they
have been designed for his eye.

When Perceval proposed last year, 1809, to Lord Grenville and Grey
to form a _part_ of his Administration, some private correspondence
in consequence of this overture took place between these Lords. They
agreed perfectly in the propriety of rejecting the terms as proposed,
but as it was just possible they might be addressed again upon a
similar occasion, they discussed the state of their own views, &c.
Ld. Grenville told Grey that whenever they came into office, and
were enabled to make the concessions deemed necessary to the Irish
Catholics, he intended to propose that his brother, Lord Buckingham,
should be the person sent over; that he had always contributed so
disinterestedly to the support of the party, that as it was his wish to
go, he considered him entitled to it. This hint was not relished, nor
was it combated; but the Grenvilles are great graspers and encroachers.

At the Installation[346] Lord Grenville promised the heads of Houses to
supply them with venison, having been promised by his brother 15 brace.
A few days before the festival Ld. B. sent to say he could not furnish
any venison, and but for the good nature of private friends he would
not have been able to fulfil his engagement. The Duke of Bedford told
me this, and was one of the persons applied to, and gave 4 brace. Ld.
B. is envious of his brother, and enjoys his feeling any mortification.

           *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: THE LAKE COUNTRY]

We made an excursion for seven weeks to the North in order to amuse
Henry, and try the effect of change of air, as he was not well. We
went by Derby and Lancashire to Appleby Castle, Ld. Thanet’s. We
stayed there a few days in order that Ld. H. might get some fishing;
from thence we went to the Lake of Ullswater, and dined at Patterdale.
Returned and slept at Penrith.

At Keswick we saw Southey, who was very agreeable; he is just about
publishing two epic poems. Windermere is the pleasantest and most
agreeable of all the Lakes to my taste. Mr. Dumont was of our party.
We went rather impromptu to Edinburgh, by the Kelso road, to see
Melrose Abbey. Kelso is a charmingly situated town and exceedingly
pretty. Melrose Abbey disappointed me greatly, especially after John
Clerk’s praise, who described it as the finest remains of the richly
wrought Gothic in the Island. I did not mind Walter Scott’s poetry,
but was very considerably chagrined at its being so very inferior
to many even in England. The high roads now making in Scotland are
very characteristic of the nation; they are _scientific and thrifty_,
for they are upon good principles, but are excessively dangerous and
alarming from the parsimony with which they are executed. They are
contrived to go upon the mountains like terraces or ledges, so that the
up and down is avoided, but then they are rather narrow, and there is
not the smallest parapet or any protection which intervenes between the
poor traveller and the deep valley below.

We remained only two days at Edinbro’. During that time poor Lady
Rosslyn[347] died unexpectedly at Rockville. We dined one day with Mr.
Clerk,[348] and were visited by the few persons then in town--Jeffrey,
Murray, &c. We went to Dunbar; then to Howick; and spent a couple of
days with Sydney Smith at Heslington, near York. I went to the Roman
Catholic convent in York, to visit the daughters of Mr. Gordon, of
Xeres; they seemed dejected and apprehensive that the state of Spain
would prevent them from joining their family.

We made a deviation from the North road to see Lincoln Minster. We were
repaid for the inconvenience of a very bad road and without exception
the worst inn in England, as the Cathedral is very curious and
magnificent. It is not so large as that of York, but the workmanship
is much richer. I was startled when I entered the Cathedral at York; I
could scarcely credit that it was the identical building which appeared
spacious and lofty formerly, my eye having been recently so accustomed
to the Cathedral at Seville which is about three times the size of
York. At York the centre aisle is wide, but the two side aisles are
narrow and low, whereas at Seville there are five aisles all equally
wide and lofty, and _beyond_ are large side chapels (at York there are
none).

From Lincoln we went through Spalding to Peterboro’; I asked at
Spalding how far off it was to the Fens. The postmaster replied that
there were no fens in Lincolnshire now, and that geese were full as
scarce as in Middlesex or elsewhere. I think it impossible he can be
correct, for, tho’ draining may do much, yet I remember such dykes and
embankments against the waters then covered with flocks of geese, about
23 years ago, that it cannot be possible those waters can have been
carried off, the bottom made sound, and put into tillage; about Boston
and Crowland I meant. Peterboro’ Cathedral has a beautiful façade;
the inside is not worth much. Katherine of Arragon and Queen Mary of
Scotland[349] are buried there.

We returned here[350] on August 2, and found all well; the library
wall rebuilt, but the house not in a condition for our reception.
Accordingly we are going off in a few days to inhabit the Govt. House
at Portsmouth, which Genl. Fox has lent most kindly to us.[351]

[Sidenote: GENERAL FERGUSON]

The few days we have been here we have seen Tom Sheridan and his wife,
Ld. Erskine, D. of Argyle, Ld. Robt., Gen. Tupper, Mr. Whishaw, Kemble,
Gen. Fox, Caroline Fox. I went one night to the Haymarket and saw the
_Iron Chest_. General Ferguson[352] has been compelled to leave Cadiz
on acct. of his health; he is afflicted with a liver complaint which
is always aggravated in a hot climate. He acted the part of a real
friend to our dear boy,[353] he went out with him in the _Lively_,
and assumed a parental authority over him. He also, upon arriving at
Cadiz, removed him from that ship, and placed him with Capt. Codrington
of the _Blake_, where he now is, and is gone up to Minorca to escort
the Spanish ships from Cadiz thither. He confirms the stories of the
desertions from the French armies, and himself conversed with _three_
native-born Frenchmen, who had deserted from want of pay and want of
food, the most pressing want.

On Thursday, -- August, left home for Portsmouth. Henry, &c.,
accompanied us; the girls were to follow a few days later. Mr. Dumont
came with us; we slept at Liphook, and reached Portsmouth on Friday.
The Government House is a very large, rambling habitation, and was
formerly a Cistercian convent.[354] From the interior arrangement of
the rooms, and very inconvenient distribution of space, one can still
trace its monastic origin. The conventual church, now converted into
the garrison chapel, communicates with the great apartment, and access
is immediate into the tribune. In that church Charles the Second
married the Infanta of Portugal.

[Sidenote: CAPTAIN MOORE]

The _séjour_ of this place has little to recommend it in the way of
drives or walks, as the confinement of a garrison town is inconvenient
for either, and indeed the whole neighbourhood more or less partakes
of the stir and din of war. We see a few naval and military persons.
General Whetham, the Lt.-Governor, a sprightly man, who talks good
French, and has a superficial smattering of the light reading in that
language; he was wounded in Flanders, and is a great favourite upon the
Terrace at Windsor. Capt. G. Moore,[355] the brother of the General,
whose good sense seems to have been bestowed in a fair division upon
him, is a pleasing, well-informed, manly, gentlemanlike person. They
are an affectionate, united family, and full of amiable qualities;
he alluded to Sir John with feeling, his eyes were full of tears
when in the course of some conversation he mentioned the narrative
written by his brother James.[356] He told me that had the General
lived to return and lay aside his command, it was his opinion that an
explanation must have taken place with Frere, as the gross personality
and insulting language in his correspondence must have been apologised
for or determined(?) in some decisive manner. Capt. Moore was at
Lisbon when the Court embarked for the _Brésils_, and accompanied the
Portuguese squadron thither, having on board many of the attendants and
dependants of the Prince Regent.

_21st Sept., 1810._--Capt. Moore told us that one day at Rio Janeiro
when Sr. Sidney Smith presented Capt. Schomberg to the Prince Regent,
the Prince said he was exceedingly happy to see Capt. S. again, as he
was the first Englishman he had seen after he left Lisbon.[357] This
was said by the Prince in a particularly marked manner, as if he meant
it to convey an indirect contradiction of Ld. Strangford’s account in
the Gazette of what passed on that occasion. Capt. Schomberg was Sir
S. Smith’s Captain when the Portuguese Court embarked for _Brésil_,
and was sent in a boat to the Prince’s ship, on board of which he
went after it was on the outside of the bar. Sir S. Smith and Ld.
Strangford went afterwards on board the P.’s ship together. Capt. Moore
is persuaded that Strangford never saw the P. R. till he went on board
of his ship with Sir Sidney. Capt. Moore saw the _Confiance_, on board
of which was Ld. S., attempting the night before to get over the
bar, and observed to someone near him that Yeo (the commander of the
_Confiance_) would not get to Lisbon before it was dark. The Prince
weighed anchor next morning before it was light. We knew from Setaro
how Strangford passed that night, and that the Prince had left his
palace and embarked with an intention of sailing with the first fair
wind two days before.

We have also seen Don Tomaso Blanco, the 2nd-in-command on board the
_Algescias_; he is the cousin of the author of the _Español_. He gave
me the news of Mde. Ariza having returned to Madrid, where she was
acting a considerable part owing to the influence she possesses over
Urquijo.[358] He was a dependent originally of the Alba family, and
owed his station in life to their favour and influence, which she now
avails herself of by claiming in return his protection. The Town Major,
who is under our roof, dined with us. Ld. Amelius Beauclerk,[359] a
nephew of Ld. Bessboro’s, and very like a Cavendish in his appearance
and demeanour. Capt. Irwin, the commander of the _Puissant_, a sheer
hulk, on board of which Charles was mustered during the period of his
residence at Dr. Burney’s at Gosport.

[Sidenote: THE FRENCH PRISONERS]

Great alarm prevails amongst those military in office, such as General
Whetham and Sr. Roger Curtis,[360] in regard to the French prisoners.
There are 17,000 at Gosport, and, in the hulks 4000 convicts lie very
close to them, and Governt., by some strange mismanagement, has
allowed French officers on their parole to live in this neighbourhood.
They say there is a general system of organisation, that each officer
has his corps, that a correspondence is maintained between them and
Napoleon’s Govt., and that it is his policy to keep them in this
country so that they might assist him in the case of an invasion. There
was in the winter 40,000 prisoners; the number is increased to 70,000
at present.

We drive and walk out in the morning, and our evenings are usually
employed in reading or hearing Mr. Dumont read French. The _Lively_ was
wrecked on the rocks near Malta; the fault is ascribed to the Lieut.
of the watch and the Master. The former neglected his official duty
of apprising the captain when they made land. This accident happened
early in Sept.; it made my heart ache, notwithstanding Charles is
safely deposited in another ship. Capt. Stewart, of the _Seahorse_,
now stationed at Palermo, to whom Charles was recommended by Gen.
Fox and Ld. Keith (it being our intention that he should join him in
the Mediterranean), being apprised of his sailing in the _Lively_,
immediately upon hearing she was wrecked sent express to Malta to order
him a supply of money and proper equipment, and also to secure a speedy
passage from thence to him. All this was done in a most obliging and
gentlemanlike manner, so as to leave a strong desire upon my mind of
returning the civility whenever any opportunity should occur.

He describes the situation of Sicily as insecure, and the prospect of a
speedy and inglorious termination to our career in it.[361] The Queen
is hostile to the English; which she manifests in every way by opposing
all propositions for the defence of the Island, by influencing the
inhabitants in ascribing to their profuseness and extravagance the high
prices of all the articles of life, and by maintaining a correspondence
with the enemy’s Courts in Italy. Murat, with his 40,000 men, was
encamped within sight, and whenever the Toulon fleet can assist him a
descent may be expected upon the Island, and already the blockading
fleet has been driven twice from Toulon as far down as Nice. I have
also a letter from Lady Amherst[362] written in great trepidation.

Miss Fox and Miss Vernon came to us; we lodged them in a tolerable
apartment in the High Street; they arrived on the 10th October.

On Saturday, 13th, we set off to spend a few days at Mr. Beauclerk’s.
Slept one night in our way at Arundel Castle. The alterations are not
completed, the whole is done upon a grand scale, but without much
taste, and without any comfort. The party was very numerous and far
from select, a _mêlée_ of neighbours and various dependents. Sr. Arthur
Pigott[363] was the only person I was acquainted with. Met at Beau.’s,
Major Capel. He was in the Galician campaign, and considered the
retreat as so disgraceful, that had the Commander survived many general
officers, for their own justification, would have insisted upon inquiry.

News of the brilliant repulse of the French at Busaco brought by the
_Apollo_ in 100 hours from the Tagus.[364]

Slept a night on our return at Worthing, to see Lord and Lady
Lansdowne. Returned to Portsmouth on Saturday, 20th October; remained
till 27th, and went to St. Anne’s, where we spent two nights. Returned
home on the 30th, and went to the play.

The King’s illness declared; it has long been suspected that the
physicians were detained as much on the account of the _father_ as on
that of the daughter.[365]

[Sidenote: BATTLE OF BUSACO]

In the _Apollo_, General Simon, who was made prisoner at the affair of
Busaco, came home. He tells a story of his having accompanied Masséna
to reconnoitre the position of Busaco, and that upon his observing _que
la position était forte_, Masséna with some asperity replied, ‘Yes, but
I have seen many stronger forced.’ Simon construed this retort into a
reproof, and answered only by requesting that if any attack was to be
made, he might be entrusted to lead on that occasion. Accordingly he
commanded a division on that day; the ascent was so steep that he was
compelled to dismount, and was soon surrounded, and made prisoner.[366]

The King being incapable of affixing the sign manual to the Act for the
further prorogation of Parliament, the two Houses met in consequence of
the prorogation expiring on Nov. 1st. It being an unexpected meeting,
very few persons, especially of Opposition, were present. Ministers,
however, had foreseen the event for a day or two, and Treasury Notes
were issued and messengers sent to Cheveley and other Ministerial
houses in the country. Ld. H. supported the proposal of adjournment
and deprecated all discussion, adding that he could have wished
the adjournment had been from day to day only. Sheridan flourished,
and affected to speak the sentiments of the Prince. He had artfully
fortified Tierney in his unsettled feeling upon the occasion, and
Tierney had injudiciously, in consequence of some strange crotchet,
abstained from going down. The Prince resides at Windsor, and conducts
himself with very unusual discretion; he has not seen or sent to any
person whatever. Sheridan has attempted to see him, but hitherto
without success.

_2nd Nov._--Pss. Amelia died. She was the youngest, the prettiest,
and the most beloved of all the Princesses; her life had been
artificially prolonged but to suffer, as her complaints were incurable
and of excruciating pain. Previous to her receiving the Sacrament,
in compliance with the earnest entreaty of the Prince, she consented
to see the Queen, with whom she had inflexibly refused to have an
interview, saying that she ascribed the misery she had undergone for 10
years, and perhaps her actual hopeless situation, to her hardness of
heart. After seeing her, she dictated a letter to the Prince telling
him that his _eloquence_ had prevailed, and taught her to survive
resentment, the last feeling in the human breast.

The P. and D. of Cambridge are joint executors to her will, which the
Prince has determined shall not be proved. The P. behaved throughout
with the greatest tenderness, and previous to her death facilitated
their interviews. The P. is behaving with the utmost circumspection
and decorum, owing partly to the occupation of fulfilling his sister’s
wishes and ordering the ceremonial of the funeral with which he is
entrusted. He has not seen any of the Opposition.

[Sidenote: THE KING’S ILLNESS]

Ld. Grenville, who came to town yesterday (9th Nov.), has had two
visits from Tommy Tyrwhitt.[367] He represents the first as an
inspection of his state of mind and body (reports being current that
he was bad and dying). He smiled and said he had passed muster very
well. The 2nd visit was to state the condition of the King, but
the communication was verbal, and the channel not such as to lead
to anything very confidential. If the bulletins between this and
Tuesday should be favourable, the news from Portugal good, and their
nerves strong, it is supposed Ministers will hazard the attempt of an
adjournment; if not, a summons for the meeting of the Privy Council
will be issued, and an examination of the physicians take place on
Wednesday, and their report be brought before the House and taken
into consideration on the day following that which is fixed for the
meeting. Probably even amongst themselves they are as yet undecided how
to proceed. Ld. G. Leveson (who speaks the language of Ld. Harrowby
probably, but does not adopt his views or sentiments) is of opinion
that if the Regency should be proposed, it will be clogged with
limitations and every species of restriction, and that any artifice
will be resorted to likely to incense the Opposition and impel them to
utter some rash expressions which will ruin them with the public.

_14th Nov._--Our leading Lords are each to maintain their former
doctrines in ’88. Ld. Grenville grounds his line upon the course he
adopted when he was Speaker, and refers to his speech, or rather book,
published with his authority. He even goes the length of consistency
so far as to hint that he would advise the P. to suggest himself the
limiting his powers as Regent; _par parenthèse_, if he were to drop
such an opinion at C. house, his favour would vanish instantly. On the
other hand, Ld. Grey is equally firm in maintaining his own opinion,
which he urged so strongly formerly. If this difference between them
should transpire before to-morrow, Ministers would avail themselves of
it and get them debating amongst themselves. Grey and Lauderdale came
up last night; I have been with them, and sitting for two hours by the
bedside of the latter, who is ill, and will hardly be able to attend
to-morrow. It is one of the few occasions when his absence will perhaps
be an advantage, as he would proclaim opinions I fear he has imbued
his companion with already too much, viz., that it would be manly and
due to the country to express the necessity of the King’s abdicating
even if he should recover from this temporary derangement, for the
loss of sight and increasing deafness are infirmities incompatible
with the performance of the kingly functions. This uttered in public
will completely ruin their cause; for, strange as it may appear, the
increasing maladies of the K. endear him to the country.

[Sidenote: THE KING’S ILLNESS]

The jokers say that the K. reigns upon the _sense of taste and touch_,
having outlived the others. On Saturday he had a lucid interval; he
asked what had been done, for ‘I know my situation!’ Poor, wretched
man, these returns of reason are most melancholy. Ld. Moira was hurt
and angry at not being sent for; he wrote up to C. H. to know the
reason. He was answered that the P. had neither written nor sent to
anybody. Such is Court favour! For who so favoured as he was? Ld.
Grenville says he _knows_ that the K. was ill several days before it
was imparted to Perceval, but who knew it, or who caused it to be kept
secret, he does not know. The D. of York is behaving ill to the P.,
taunting him with old allusions, and when there is a favourable symptom
exulting in a manner which denotes his joy that they have a chance of
escaping his dominion. The sending for Reynolds and Willis was without
the knowledge or consent of the R. family. Ld. Grey shakes his hopes by
his fears as to Portugal; he considers the case as desperate, and Ld.
Wellington’s army quite ruined. This belief is grounded upon Ponsonby
information, and none of that family can be credited, especially
_Snouch_[368] and Ld. Ponsonby.

On the 15th Parlt. met in the Lords. The Chancellor and Ld. Liverpool
held out great hopes of a recovery. Ld. Grey worked skilfully upon very
tender ground, no other than in plain English saying that if the King
recovered it was only to a state of dotage, and that the loss of sight
and hearing disqualified a man, without even the loss of reason, from
fulfilling the functions of a sovereign.[369] The Ministers were not
in spirits, else they might have replied and done him great mischief
in the country. Ward, who is a _friend_, sneeringly observed that the
_Whig_ earl would make few proselytes to the doctrine deposing the
Monarch. Ld. Grenville spoke, but, I was sorry to hear, in a feeble,
disorganised state. Ld. Moira took a line of his own in favour of
adjournt., affecting to speak the language of the P. Indeed, with much
affectation, he told Lds. Grey and Lansdowne that his speech he was
conscious was _bad_, but that was always the case when a person spoke
contrary to their own opinion; but he was compelled by instructions
from a quarter he was bound to obey, designating as distinctly as
possible the Prince. In the Commons Burdett provoked a division, in
which persons voted as they liked. Grey, Lauderdale, Ld. Ponsonby,
Jersey, and Tierney came here after the debate and dined. The King is
certainly worse, and the Ministers are puzzled.

_27th Nov._--Ld. Grenville quitted town the day after the adjournt.,
_oppressed_ by the recollection of his former opinions delivered when
Speaker; but since, whether the continued illness of the King or other
equally cogent reasons have convinced him that he may relax, it seems
he has written to Ld. Grey, to inform him that upon reflection he does
not feel the necessity so imperious of urging these opinions, for tho’
he maintains the same principles, yet expediency qualifies them at
present. It is expected that the summons for the convoking the Privy
Council will be issued this evening indiscriminately to all Councillors.

[Sidenote: AFFAIRS AT CADIZ]

Mr. Adair, _alias_ the melancholy Jaques, arrived here a few days ago,
and still continues our inmate in his way from Constantinople. He
stopped at Cadiz, and brings very interesting accounts of the first
meeting of the Cortes.[370] Arguelles, Capmany, Gallego, Torneros are
the leading speakers. I know very little upon these matters, but it
strikes me that they have been guilty of great impolicy in excluding
the Grandees from their body, as it must make them feel irritated
at the slight. Were I one of that class, shut up upon that dreary
causeway, my sole occupation would be to quit them and join any party
where my territorial influence would be considered; for these Grandees,
with scarce any exception, fled with the Patriots, and sacrificed
their _all_ to what they considered was the _common cause_, but which
to their consternation and mortification they now find was only the
cause of a few; not to say that it would be some satisfaction to
assist in overthrowing the _patriotic Junta_, created upon principles
far different from the former practice when the Cortes used in ancient
times to be assembled. By this scheme of exclusion they create in the
heart of the little community a strong interest against themselves.
Formerly the _bravo Militar_, which was the nobility, were an integral
part of the Cortes; now they are not called. Mr. Stuart, of Lisbon,
and Ld. Wellington write home against them as having a Jacobinical
tendency, and being merely a _réchauffé_ of the French Revolution.

The latest Governt. accts. are to the 12th from the Tagus, Sr. Robt.
Wilson[371] _en debite_ news of the 15th, with the story of Drouet
having joined with 15 _bataillons_, which makes about 9000 men.
Sr. Robt. is greatly and justly offended at having been dismissed
officially the Portuguese service; this naturally enough tinctures
all his opinions and disposes him to view _au noir_ both Wellington’s
and Beresford’s campaign. The enemies of Wilson accuse him of having
taken great credit to himself for resistance in the _Puerto de Baños_
after the battle of Talavera, whereas Ld. W. has recently discovered
that he did nothing whatever there.[372] Also there is another charge,
which, if substantiated, is serious, but from his general reputation is
considered as highly improbable, viz., peculating in his transactions
about raising the Lusitanian Legion. He is a very active officer,
and whatever blemishes he may have in rhodomontading, I know from
experience, having been in the country at the time, that when every
other English officer took to his heels, he alone remained, and by
setting a good face upon matters kept in check at Salamanca a French
corps of 6000 men, when he was in Ciudad Rodrigo with only a few half
dismounted cannon and some of his miserable Legion.

Bulletins bad; Ministers defer till the latest hour issuing the summons
of the Privy Council. Great failures at Liverpool. Huskisson’s pamphlet
upon the report of the Finance Committee, a very general topic of
conversation.[373] L., a little jealous, accuses him of stealing some
of his own best observations and disfiguring them for concealment.

_28th._--Hurrah! Huzza! A long and delightful letter from Charles, and
a copious journal of all that has occurred since he sailed from Cadiz
Bay, 7th August! He writes from Gibraltar Bay, 5th November, then in
quarantine on acct. of symptoms of fever. Inquires if the ex-pigs are
likely to have a little suck. Seems not so keen for Navy as before;
thank Heaven, if he should at the end of a year sicken of it! _Oxala!_

The Privy Council is called to-day for the examination of physicians.
Baillie remains at Windsor to attend the K. during the absence of the
others, but comes for examination to-morrow. Great rumours of adjournt.
being again intended.

_29th, Thursday._--Evidence of the medical men favourable as to
amendment, but nothing said as to the time for recovery.

[Sidenote: THE PRINCE OF WALES’ CONDUCT]

_Dec. 6th._--There has been a communication with the Prince; the
complection of the business is not very favourable. It seems that
in consequence of a trivial expression dropped accidentally in a
conversation Ld. Grey held with Mr. Tucker, the latter gentleman
conceived it to be sufficiently important to induce him to _repeat_ it
to Col. McMahon[374] to report to the Prince. The expression was that
affairs were in that state that, ‘if the Prince were to hold up his
finger he would have every thing his own way.’

The Prince, who sees Adam frequently, had talked to him frankly enough
in general. One day during their conversation the Lord Chancellor
solicited an audience: the P. desired he might be admitted, and
at the same time begged Adam to wait, as he should soon close his
conference with the C. It was, however, of some duration, but when Adam
returned, he assured him the visit was merely one of form respecting
some circumstances connected with the Pss. Amelia’s will; that he had
listened and made no reply beyond a very formal bow. This might, or
might not be true; Adam had his doubts. The Prince then began saying
(which astonished Adam) that he had received a communication from Ld.
Grey, who implied that he had not taken part enough in the business
of the K.’s illness. That he might be right or wrong, but that he was
resolved upon remaining quiet; that he esteemed both Lords Grenville
and Grey, but could not see them; that if they wished to serve him they
ought to ask Ministers in Parlt. whether any official notification
had been made to the Prince of the condition in which H. Majesty was;
also that if he were compelled by circumstances to maintain them, yet
if they got into minorities by their mismanagement, he might then be
enabled to follow his inclination and call them,--Opposition, to his
Council. He desired Adam to communicate this to Lds. Grenville, Grey,
and Mr. Ponsonby; Tommy Tyrwhitt also told Ld. Grenville. It was agreed
that a respectful answer should be conveyed to the Prince, couched in
all the usual proper terms; the substance, however, declining to adopt
any line of conduct expressed through a secret understanding, as it
would be doing exactly what they had so much deprecated during their
own Administration--that of the King ostensibly employing them, but,
at the same time, consulting with his secret advisers. Ld. Grenville
said that the position of affairs might be such that were the Prince to
consult him, he did not know but that he might recommend him to keep
the present Ministers; but having done that he must withdraw and act
upon his own principles until he was publicly called as an adviser. The
expression which put Ld. G. upon the alert was that of the possibility
of minorities, which he construed into a determined plan of Prince’s
betraying those he openly supported. Ld. Grey was compelled to leave
town on acct. of Ly. Grey’s lying-in.

Subsequent to this transaction, Adair, on the pretext of giving the
P. some curious anecdotes of his Embassy, solicited an audience, and
by dint of solicitation at length obtained one. In the course of the
interview, the P. launched out in his eloquent, rhodomontading manner,
abused the late Ministry (always excepting Ld. H., whom he professes so
much to love), whom he accused of treating him worse than his avowed
enemies. Added that he knew they now complained of his not sending for
them, but that he would be d---- if he did; they accused him of being
timid and nervous, but that by G---- they and the world should see
that he was _un homme de nerf_; that he would not be dictated to by
the haughty freaks and caprices of any man; turned frequently to the
portrait of Mr. Fox, whose death was to him an irreparable loss, for he
really loved him, and in any critical juncture his advice was always
that of a sincere friend who was blessed with the soundest head man
ever possessed; abused the late Cabinet for their treatment of him in
the affair of the Princess, and, in short, spoke with all the vehemence
and irritation of an offended and wounded mind.

_7th Dec., 1810._--The bulletin yesterday was less favourable, and that
of to-day is indifferent; admits that the disorder had returned, but
that some hours of sleep had refreshed him. By the private acct. it
seems that his bodily indisposition is rather alarming, a recurrence
of the stoppage in his bowels; his body is greatly emaciated. Phipps,
the expert oculist but very silly man, has been prevented by Willis’s
orders from seeing him, as he was detected in talking upon religious
matters, future state, dying, &c., &c. The report yesterday was that
Ministers, if by the King’s relapsing they should be compelled to
resort to some mode of Regency, intended to have that of the _Lords
Justices_. To-day Mr. Grenville told me that the scheme was to make
the Queen Regent. All these schemes will perplex and frighten the
Prince, and drive him to resort to his friends. Ld. H. saw McMahon, who
declares that Ld. Moira and Sheridan, who are affecting to speak the
language and sentiments of C. House, on the contrary, have displeased
the Prince, whom they do not see and whom they have not had any
authority whatever from to act as they do. Whilst the P. is in town
he sees no person whatever but Lady Hertford, with whom he spends the
whole morning and evening. Mr. Michael Angelo Taylor he sees as a butt,
but with him he holds no sort of intercourse respecting his political
opinions. They say Govt. has money for 10 days longer.

_15th Dec._--On Thursday the Houses met; the K.’s health not being in
a state for the physicians to report upon with any hope of immediate
recovery, Ministers did not suggest an adjournt., but proposed a
Committee for the purpose of examining the physicians. The choice of
persons in Commons was very fair, in the Lords less so, as neither
Lds. Lauderdale, Holland, or Stanhope are named, which, considering
the absence of Ld. Grey, is not so right.[375] Except Ld. Erskine and
the D. of Norfolk, there is not a man who will ask a leading question,
and these will be overruled. The Prince broke down in Kensington on
his way to Windsor. When Ld. Grenville heard of it he affected to be
facetious, and wondered the Princess did not offer him a bed; true it
was the Prince was excessively afraid of her offering him a carriage,
which she certainly would have done had she known of it at the moment.
The projects of raising money by the Privy Seal, &c., are dropped.

[Sidenote: THE GOVERNMENT RESOLUTIONS]

_18th Dec._--It appears from the examination of the physicians that the
King’s illness is such that a Regency must be resorted to immediately;
consequently yesterday Mr. Perceval proposed 3 resolutions the same
as those in 1788. 1st, that on account of H. M. indisposition he was
unable to discharge the duties of the kingly office. 2ndly, that it was
the duty of the House to see that the kingly office be properly filled.
3rdly, that it was necessary to provide for the proper discharge of the
same by way of a Bill to pass through both Houses of Parlt. Sheridan,
Ponsonby, and Adam have thrown down the gauntlet and taken the field;
the Prince’s household will vote. There is a Call of the House, and now
the Prince takes a part there will be a very good division. Some of
the most sanguine go the length of expecting a majority; there is no
doubt but many shabby ones will desert the Ministers. The usual supply
of those upon these occasions from the City will fail on acct. of the
report of the Bullion Committee, as they will prefer taking their
chance of keeping Perceval Chancellor of the Exchequer to making the
Bank pay in specie.[376]

It was not with any satisfaction I heard of a few additional votes
by the accession of Mr. Canning and his friends upon this question.
Majorities, even if helped by a faithless associate, are mere ropes
of sand. Faithless and unprincipled are the leading traits in that
gentleman’s character. It is said that he complains of having met with
so little warmth from the Opposition, with whom he would have acted
long ago had he been encouraged. The greediness for numbers makes me
dread his reception; all who dislike Whitbread, and that is a huge
majority, and all who feel the incapacity of _Snouch_, are inclined to
hearken to his overtures. Ld. Castlereagh, though labouring under many
heavy charges for his conduct towards the Irish Catholics, has still
maintained a sort of integrity of reputation for private honour; he
also has the advantage of being a person whom the Prince would prefer
if any junction were to be made with new men, and his ambition is of a
limited nature, as he would confine himself to his department and only
promote persons either from goodwill towards them, or for the general
advantage of the Administration to which he belonged. He makes no high
professions of exalted principle, but as a gentleman and man of honour
he might be trusted. In the late curious quarrel between him and Mr.
Canning, his conduct was much admired, and his bitterest enemies said
how infamously must he have been treated by his colleague, when even in
Ireland he is considered as the injured party.

Several questions in the Committee were expunged. In that of the Lords
the word _mind_ was employed, when Ld. Westmorland, with an air of the
greatest feeling and pathos, implored that it might be erased, as it
was too shocking to have on record: this great delicacy _from him_, who
is at this moment dictating evidence to enable him to confine his own
wife, in order to avoid the expense of a separate maintenance. Sheridan
laughed at the conduct in the examination of the physicians, where he
said they questioned the physicians about the mental malady and the mad
doctor upon the bodily disease. It appeared that the Chancellor was
introduced to the K. by way of a _medical expedient_ by Vaughan, who
had observed that in his presence the King had more _self command_. In
consequence of this transpiring, the Chancellor, in their Committee,
conceived himself bound to go the whole length of the business to
acquit himself of seeking the interview with the King.

MacMahon says the Regency is to be accepted on any conditions by the
Prince, who will return the same letter by way of answer, as that he
sent in ’88 (said letter, Mr. Adam says, was written by Lord Minto,
materials from Mr. Fox); that he may probably tell these Ministers that
it is his intention to keep them for decency sake, but that he has no
confidence whatever in them, and cannot feel that he is fulfilling his
duty. In short, if they do not, which he expects they will, resign
upon this intimation, he will keep them a month to give the King a
chance of recovery, and then dismiss them. The Queen will have the
custody and control of the King’s person and household, and to set off
with, she can appoint the Chamberlain, now vacant by the death of Lord
Dartmouth.[377]

[Sidenote: THE KING OF SWEDEN]

The King of Sweden[378] lives chiefly with the French Princes, and now
occupies the apartment vacant by the death of the Queen of France. He
is _très in-amusable_, very much absorbed in his own thoughts, and
indifferent to all that is going on around him. He has very little
money, but will not accept of any from the English; 500_l._ and jewels
estimated at 30,000_l._ on the Continent are all he is worth. When
lodged at the hotel, he asked for an inferior apartment to that which
was prepared for his reception, and accused the master of imposing
upon him by charging for a whole bottle of wine, when he had only
drunk about half of it and returned the remainder. He does not speak
of the Swedes with any irritation, allows they were in the right for
dismissing him as he did not suit them, resolves not to attempt to be
restored, and only hopes his moderation may induce them hereafter to
consider his son. This is not madness certainly, but nevertheless he is
reckoned to be in a state of melancholy madness. Lucien Bonaparte is
arrived,[379] but he is not to be allowed to come to London; Ludlow is
named as his place of residence.

_24th Dec._--On Thursday, the day of the debate in the H. of Commons
upon the resolutions, the Prince received a letter from Mr. Perceval
informing him of the intentions of the Ministry. To this the Princes
wrote what they call a solemn protest of the male branches of the Royal
family, disapproving of the limitations and restrictions. Prince also
wrote a good reply, which was the composition of himself and Sheridan.
War between Perceval and the Prince being openly declared, all the
household, &c., of Carlton House voted. This, however, produced no
great accession of _rats_, only the Seymours and Mr. Monkton. The
Grenvilles being disunited upon the subject may acct. for the badness
of the division. Mr. Horner made an admirable speech, full of sound
argument upon constitutional doctrines, and illustrated with most
accurate learning. Tierney says he gave the House for two hours two
quarts of Allen’s milk without their making a wry face; alluding to S.
Smith’s joke that Mr. A. is quite a milch cow to the politicians, whom
he furnishes with matter and argument, and has in this business done so
abundantly to those who are studying the subject. Mr. Canning made but
a bad attempt at pleasantry. Ld. Castlereagh, speaking of the conduct
of Addington’s Administration during the K.’s illness, said he believed
that Governt. _did not practise any concealments towards him_, or
something to that effect. The House immediately applied it as a slap to
Mr. Canning. Others say it was a mere slip of the tongue. Wm. Lamb on
the following day distinguished himself very greatly; he is certainly
one of the most rising men in public. The great feature of that night’s
proceeding was Perceval’s indiscreet avowal of his principles of delay
and Ministerial Regency (without limitations), from which Tom Grenville
remarks that as Perceval has now declared himself King, Lords, and
Commons upon his own _responsibility_, the whole question is shortened
and made much less complicated.

[Sidenote: DUKE OF QUEENSBERRY’S DEATH]

The D. of Queensberry died to-day without a struggle at three o’clock;
his will has not yet been opened.[380] His heirs-at-law are the D. of
Buccleugh, Sr. Chas. Douglas, Lord Wemyss.[381] He expressed a wish of
altering his will yesterday, but was too rambling. He said he had been
a fool in leaving legacies, for in fact all belonged to Bonaparte, and
any distribution was idle. He has always said and believed in this.

On Sunday, 6th Jan., the Prince sent to see Ld. Grenville, who
accordingly waited upon him at Carlton House; the communication was
made through Mr. Adam. Prince, when he came, desired this might be
considered as a joint application to him, as well as to Ld. Grey, who
unfortunately was not arrived in town. The immediate object of the
interview was to have advice how to frame the answer to the deputation
which was coming from the two Houses, to offer the Regency. He then
told Ld. G. that he felt his situation very embarrassing, that it would
be difficult to act in any way to please people, or make a strong
Government. That he heard from those who were in the H. of C. that the
great difficulties rested there, that he wished Ld. G. to understand
that he was against exclusions, and if it were judged expedient to
resort to additional strength, meaning Canning, he had, whatever
his own opinions respecting him individually were, no objections to
the experiment. He said there was also another topic which he had
at heart, the restoring his brother to be Commander-inChief.[382]
Ld. G. replied that he should bear in mind all H.R.H. had said, and
consult with his friends upon the subject, but that he thought it an
act of duty without any hesitation to state that the obstacles to the
restoration of the D. of York were insurmountable; that they existed
amongst those most attached to the Whig Party; that he himself deplored
the injustice of persons upon that subject, and, if he might venture
to use such an expression, to so exalted a character. He added that he
felt the greatest _compassion_ for the Duke, who had been so cruelly
misrepresented and slandered. The Prince bid him communicate with Ld.
Moira and his other friends. Adam told this on the day of the interview.

Ld. Grenville made a formal communication to politicians at his own
house on the following Tuesday. Ld. H. had a private conversation with
him in which he stated his own opinions upon the necessity, if they
formed a Governt., of considering maturely the question of Spain and
Portugal with regard to withdrawing the troops, &c.; also of the state
of the press, which was under Ld. Ellenboro’ greatly harassed.

[Sidenote: QUESTION OF REGENCY]

On Wednesday night Ld. Grey arrived in town; he came here in evening,
appointed on the ensuing day to go to Carlton House. Prince very
gracious, cordial, and more communicative than with Ld. Grenville. Upon
mention of additional strength in House of Commons, Grey remonstrated
upon the fallacy of strength being obtained by the accession alluded
to (Canning), where sturdy old friends would be lost entirely. Prince
observed the clamour excited by Grenville’s resistance as Auditor
to the issuing money from the Exchequer, conceived it fatal to his
being attached to the Treasury; folly of his letter to Perceval. They
separated most amicably. Ld. Grey went directly to frame a reply for
P. to the deputation which was next day to offer, from the two Houses,
the Regency. Informed the Prince, if their paper did not meet his
wishes, that he dined at Ld. Holland’s in Pall Mall, where he should
remain to receive H.R.H. commands. We had only Ld. Thanet and Tierney,
Ld. H. confined by the gout. At twelve at night, Adam, accompanied by
Sheridan, came from C. H., bearing a message from the P., which in
plain language was a total rejection of the paper drawn up by Lds.
Grey and Grenville, and sending them another, the joint composition
of himself and S. Ld. Grey with great moderation and temper declined
giving any opinion upon the subject, his own being rejected; said they
could not be responsible for sentiments they had not written. Sheridan,
who had thrust himself into the whole transaction, protested against
their responsibility, alleging that the Prince was not himself in a
condition to invest persons with responsibility, that he had drawn a
paper, and Ld. Moira had done the same. After Ld. Grey went away, such
a scene of duplicity and jealousy was exhibited by S. beyond all belief
or description; it required all Adam’s forbearance and good temper to
prevent great asperity in the discussion. Ld. H. contended for the
responsibility, considering the sending for these Lords as an open act
similar to that of a King upon his accession employing a certain set
of persons to answer the address from the Privy Council, as his future
Ministers.

They went off to C. H. at two o’clock. By Adam’s report, S.’s
description of what had passed here was a most gross misrepresentation,
and a malicious interpretation of every word uttered. They all parted
in wrath; the P. determining to keep what S. made him believe was his
own, whereas in fact it was S.’s. This is one of his artifices by
which he ensnares the P., first suggesting ideas and words, which he
dexterously contrives to make the P. believe are his own. (He avowed
this to us some months ago.[383]) Some of Sheridan’s phrases were
very bad. The Prince was to say in a taunting manner that he hoped
the authority he was to be invested with would be as _brief_ as it
was _restricted_, showing a silly soreness towards the Parliament.
On Friday the deputation came; and the paper composed by S. and the
Prince was delivered. Grey and Grenville upon the rejection of their
paper drew up a remonstrance glancing at secret advisers, which they
delivered to Adam to give to the Prince. In the meantime the P.
expressed a wish to explain to Ld. H. the whole transaction, and fixed
calling upon him on Saturday. By a mistake of Ld. Moira’s, Ld. H.
waited for him, as he ought to have told him that the P. could not come
till this day, Sunday, 13th Jan., 1811, Pall Mall.

The interview was long; only Mr. Adam present. Authorised an
explanation to the two Lords, that he did not conceive his application
to them could as _yet_ be considered as official. Consequently they
were not in any responsible situation; that they proceeded upon a
misconception.

[Sidenote: GRENVILLE’S AUDITORSHIP]

_Sunday, 20th._--A very _stormy_ week, but down to this evening the
political horizon brightens. When the two Lords began to discuss
arrangements the difficulties seemed insurmountable. Ld. Grey reminded
Lord Grenville of the conversation they had formerly had together upon
the subject of the impossibility of his holding his place of Auditor of
the Exchequer with that of the First Ld. of the Treasury. Ld. Grenville
alleged _poverty_, proposed that Tom,[384] who _par parenthèse_, has
been voluntarily out of Parlt. these three years, should have the
Admiralty and the first peerage. Upon the obstacle of the Auditorship
being strongly re-argued, a singular paper was delivered in to Grey,
in which statements were made of the condition of the First Lords for
the preceding 40 years, all of whom had enjoyed large places with the
Treasury; stating his own difficulties of undertaking such an expensive
station with the mere addition of 1000_l._ pr. ann.; that he should
be overwhelmed with debt. That he could not consent to take the Home
Department without an express and distinct understanding that _all_ the
Patronage of _Church_ and _State_ which had hitherto gone through the
First Ld. of Treasury, should be annexed to the Home Department. That
the Minutes of Cabinet should be drawn up by Ld. G. and laid before the
Regent or King; that he could not yield his pre-eminence; and rather
an arrogant and flourishing termination. The whole composition evinced
a sordid and low mind. Scarcely had it been sent, before Ld. Auckland
was dispatched to recover it. Ld. Grey hesitated, because if a rupture
became inevitable, it was such a complete acquittal of himself.

By-the-bye, I forgot to mention that the _first_ hitch arose from a
proposal on the part of Lord Grenville that, from the state of the H.
of Commons they ought to look about them for _strength_, that the lists
were not satisfactory, and that they could not be sure of majorities.
The plain English of this was that they wanted an organ of their own,
Canning for instance, as a barrier against the popular principles of
the Whigs and the unpopular and odious manners of Whitbread, whom
unfortunately all parties concur in hating, however they may respect
him as a public character. Ld. Grey replied that upon consulting his
own friends, he was satisfied that the numbers were such as to enable a
Govt, to go on well, that by taking Mr. C. weight would be lost, not
gained; for the gain would be 10 votes, and the loss of three times
that number of real, staunch friends. That upon the mere report of
such a junction already Mr. Coke declared his first vote under the new
Governt. should be against them, if Mr. C. composed one of the Govt.;
also that Messrs. Byng, Brand, &c., were of the same opinion, Ld. J.
Cavendish, and most of the old Foxites.

[Sidenote: WHIG DISUNION]

Ld. Grenville seemed thunderstruck at Grey’s urging that if a motion
was made by the enemy against the union of the offices of Treasurer
and Auditor, it would be impossible to prevent many of their own
friends from voting against them. In the evening Ld. G. wrote to Grey
to say that the point in discussion could not be canvassed by them in
conversation. Proposed by Grey that Ld. Spencer should be First Lord
of Treasury; Grenvilles all eager to declare that he had entirely
withdrawn from public life. Various other modes suggested, such as
Ld. Grenville’s placing the Auditorship in trust and not receiving
the salary whilst he enjoyed the Treasury. On the 16th matters seemed
in a state of complete disunion, and the differences between the
two Lords began to be talked of in public. In stating the friends
with whom Ld. Grenville said he should consult before he came to a
final determination, he mentioned Lords Stafford and Carrington. He
now talked of giving up all idea of forming an Administration, and
recommending the Prince to keep the present Ministers; but Ld. Grey
will not agree, as in his opinion it is a scandalous desertion of the
Prince. Tom Grenville has begged Grey not to be offended at any dryness
and formality in the style of Ld. Grenville’s letters, as official
habits early in life make all he writes upon topics of business seem
as dry as a chip. In conversation it had been thrown out that the
Treasury stripped and degraded would not be fit for Ld. Grey to accept,
but that George Ponsonby or Lord Lansdowne might do the duties of it;
but this was not listened to, it being impossible, notwithstanding all
Lord Grenville said of the present salary, patronage, and influence
of the Treasury being a usurpation upon the patronage of the Home
Department, to consent to such a glaring alteration as to reduce that
which had been hitherto considered as the first office in the State
to as low a condition even as a mere Lord of the Treasury. From Lord
Temple’s language, which is violent and indiscreet, and from Tom’s,
which tho’ milder and more guarded betrays much soreness, it is clear
that it is not the numbers of the H. of Commons which induced them to
urge a junction with Mr. Canning, but that they felt they had no man of
their _own_, and could not submit to be represented by such persons as
Whitbread, &c.

However, at present (21st) all stands well again. On 18th Ld. Grenville
with great good humour has given up his schemes of advancement (?),
and is content to take the Treasury, yielding all the other offices to
Ld. Grey’s nomination, excepting the Secretary at War for Ld. Temple,
and the Board of Control, with a seat in Cabinet!! for Ld. Auckland;
and with respect to the Auditorship, he offered to put it into trust,
but could not afford to give up the salary, and all he required was
that Whitbread should acquiesce in the arrangement and defend it, were
it to be attacked in Parlt. This proposal was submitted to Whitbread,
and strongly urged by Lds. Grey and Holland, but he could not be
brought to agree, tho’ he acknowledged that in principle he had no
objection to the Auditorship being vested in trust whilst Ld. G. held
the Treasury. He admitted that so far from thinking that 4000_l._ a
year was too great an addition to the present salary of the Treasury,
that he was ready to propose in the House of Commons that the salary
of that and of every high office should be raised to 10,000_l._ pr.
ann., but he could not defend his holding the two offices. He grounds
his objection upon a foolish piece of personal vanity, having last year
demanded, in an imperative tone, of Perceval whether Yorke received his
salary of Teller of Exchequer during his enjoyment of the emoluments
of First Lord of Admiralty, and having, as he thought, intimidated
them from it as he was answered in the negative, he could not bring
himself to defend what he had by his tone reprobated in public. He
was very obstinate in his manner, and gave a specimen of his want of
conciliating disposition for hereafter, tho’ in this instance he was
not so much in the wrong, as he had been assured in the beginning of
the arrangements that Ld. G. would give it up. Whitbread continued
inflexible, and on the 19th Ld. Grey wrote a very handsome letter to
Lord Grenville’s proposal, in which he stated Whitbread’s unwillingness
to defend the measure, expressing his own sincere regret at W.’s
resolution, adding that he could not bring himself to act with Mr.
Canning, and therefore nothing remained for him but to abandon all
thoughts of taking part in the Govt., leaving Ld. G. at liberty to
form whatever Administration he chose, which he was ready to engage he
should not oppose, tho’ he could not assist. Ld. Grenville was hurt at
Whitbread’s conduct. On 20th, in morning, Ld. Grenville consented to
give up the salary of Auditor during his being at the head of Treasury.
They were to go on the following day to the Prince, which is the day
appointed for their answer.

_21st Jan._--The paper they delivered to the Prince was to inform him
that they were ready to undertake the Govt., but advising him before he
undertakes the Regency to institute an examination of physicians as to
the state of the King’s health, and if the result should be that it is
probable that the King would be so far recovered within any limited
time so as to be able to resume the exercise of the royal functions,
in that case they advise him not to change the Ministers, giving them
such an explanation of his motives for retaining them as would prevent
him from being justly considered as approving, much less as adopting,
the system of their policy. The whole was a very vague, loose way of
expressing themselves.

[Sidenote: THE QUEEN’S LETTER]

On Tuesday the Prince sent for them again, and showed a letter he had
received from the Queen (Mr. Adam would not allow me to take a copy).
‘My dearest son, you will be, I am sure, highly gratified to hear
that the King is considerably improved in health; he had an interview
this morning with Mr. Perceval, who was much satisfied with his whole
appearance. He held a very reasonable conversation, and inquired with
great interest all that had been done, and expressed himself with
kindness towards you, and said he was pleased with yr. conduct _pending
this business_. I send my own servant that there may be no delay in yr.
receiving this agreeable information. (Signed) Charlotte,’

The Prince ridiculed the artifice, which was too gross to escape
detection. What woman, he said, ever used the Westminster Hall term
of _pending the business_? They thought him shook and little disposed
to encounter the clamour of a change. He showed them a letter from
Perceval in which he represented the state of public business as
pressing. The Prince begged them to write the answer, which was done
offhand.

On withdrawing they agreed to assemble a meeting of their future
Cabinet to take the business into consideration, and on Thursday,
31st Jan., they met both morning and evening. It was agreed that they
should, in consequence of the representation in Perceval’s letter of
the state of the army and navy and the progress of private Bills
(which he artfully had pressed on), communicate to the Prince that it
would be subjecting the country to very material injury if he delayed
48 hours longer the bringing his mind to a determination, either of
changing the Ministry, or retaining those now in their offices. In the
meantime Sr. Henry Halford (Dr. Vaughan), who had been suspected of
meddling more with the body politic than with the diseased physical
body he was called in to attend, had frequent audiences of the Prince,
in which he worked upon his imagination and fears by drawing the
picture of the King agitated and thrown into an exa--tion [_sic_] which
might end fatally; their removing his confidential servants would
inevitably produce that effect. It is also suspected that he added if
the King recovered and found things stationary he would not reassume
the authority, and that the Prince might continue in power. There
are besides a hundred little anecdotes, which by not writing at the
time have escaped my memory. There was also a letter from the D. of
Cumberland, who said, ‘_Vaughan has behaved nobly to us all_.’

The Prince was very much agitated, and on Friday he saw Adam, Lds.
Moira and Hutchinson, to whom he stated the distracted state of his
mind, and bid them do justice to his feelings. In the evening he sent
Adam and Ld. Hutchinson to Camelford House, by appointment to Lds. G.
and G., intimating that in consequence of the report of the physicians
as to the probable recovery of the King, he had resolved not to remove
the Ministers, hoped they approved, thanked them for their generous
conduct, and begged to see them on the following Sunday, and also Ld.
Holland, Mr. G. Ponsonby.

[Sidenote: AFFAIRS IN SICILY]

_October, 1811._--Sudden return of Ld. Wm. Bentinck[385] from Sicily
for further instructions, after an absence of only a few weeks, has
surprised people, and convinced them of his want of capacity and
timidity of character. It is understood that his instructions were
merely an echo of those given to his predecessor, Lord Amherst, the
substance of which was to induce the Court by moderate means to admit
the native Sicilians into the Governt., and to diminish the burthens
upon the people, and various other points of importance. Ld. Wm. is
accused of having very unskilfully in his first paper to Circello
betrayed the whole context of his secret instructions; whereupon
its not appearing that Ld. Wm. had the power of withholding the
subsidy Circello made a most able diplomatic reply, deprecating the
interference of any foreign power, however allied, with the internal
Governt., and giving it plainly to be understood that _allies_ who
acted thus might withdraw their forces. Upon the receipt of this, Ld.
Wm., without further discussion, got on board the first vessel, which
happened to be Capt. Clifford, of the _Cephalus_, gun brig, and came
home. It is said Ministers were astonished, but declared everywhere
that they were highly pleased at his conduct. As that is _impossible_,
the glossing it over must be out of compliment to the D. of Portland.
The report is that the Cabinet have resolved upon vigorous measures,
and those who know the Queen believe she will not resist, but in case
of her being so disposed, she is to be made to submit, and a retreat
into Austria suggested as her best resource. The unfortunate Barons
who were imprisoned in consequence of their appeal,[386] are left
in severe confinement, and Prince Belmonte, who is in a precarious
state of health, will certainly not survive the confinement in one of
the worst dungeons, and in the most unwholesome spot in the Island.
The idle English, by their silly language in the coffee houses have
contributed much towards irritating the Queen. Fredk. Lamb[387] is at
last to accompany Ld. Wm.

[Sidenote: COMMISSION TO MEXICO]

The Commissioners to Mexico are to begin their peregrinations in about
3 weeks; it is a trading voyage. Capt. Cockburn,[388] who is one and
is to have the rank of Commodore and a flag, goes first to Lisbon
to pick up Mr. Stewart; then to Cadiz for the Spaniards; to Jamaica
for Mr. Morier; and finally to Vera Cruz. From what is said, the
expedition seems to be rather a wild goose chase. It is not certain
that the Spanish Governt. will accept the offered mediation. When it
was originally proposed, they accepted, annexing the condition that
if the colonies did not within 15 months fall into their allegiance
to the Mother Country, that in that case the English should assist
with military force and compel them to submit by subduing them. This
condition has not been acceded to on the part of this Governt.,
but they send out this Commission, without waiting for the final
determination of the Govt. of Cadiz, now they know that they are
only to be supported in any pacific measures. The man upon whom much
depends is Bardachi, a sort of Secretary of State, who, with some
abilities and honesty, is full of prejudice against this country, and
of an impracticable temper. B. Hoppner is Sec. to the Commission.
Frere, who has been living here upwards of a month, to my astonishment
expressed himself surprised and offended that he had been neglected by
Ld. Wellesley, saying that from his knowledge of Spain he considered
himself as the fittest to be employed; boasted of his influence
over Bardachi, who owes his place to him, and various other such
_absurdities_. I was petrified, it not being possible to acquiesce in
the reasonableness of his complaint, or consider it as an injury the
not selecting him.




                              APPENDICES




                              APPENDIX A

The following lines are taken from Lord Holland’s verses ‘To a lady on
her Birthday, Florence, March 25, 1795.’[389]

    When twice twelve times the rolling earth
    Brought back the period of her birth,
    Thus to the Genius of the day
    A certain Dame was heard to pray:
    ‘Give me, indulgent Genius, give
    ’Midst learned cabinets to live,
    ’Midst curiosities, collections,
    Specimens, medals, and dissections,
    With books of every tongue and land
    All difficult to understand,
    With instruments of various sorts,
    Telescopes, air pumps, tubes, retorts,
    With friends, fair wisdom to pursue,
    Fontana, Macie, Blagden, Drew.’

           *       *       *       *       *

    Such are thy wishes, but if kind
    The Gods, and of a mortal’s mind,
    These sacrifices they will spare,
    And long preserve you what you are;
    And when obdurate time besprinkles
    Your head with grey, your face with wrinkles,
    When sickness and when age shall come
    And wither transient beauty’s bloom,
    Still shall the beauties of your mind,
    By reading and by time refin’d,
    Still shall thy wit and polish’d ease
    In spite of fickle nature please;
    And then th’ enchanted world shall see
    Rochefoucauld’s laws belied in thee,
    See female merit youth outlive,
    And loveliness thy charms survive.
    So when old Time’s relentless page
    At full threescore shall mark thy age,
    With equal truth but better verse
    Some Bard thy merits shall rehearse,
    And like myself be proud to pay
    A tribute to this happy day.

Thirty-six years afterwards, on March 25, 1831, Lord Holland gave his
wife another copy of verses, and the reader will probably be interested
in seeing a short selection from them.

    I promised you, ’tis long ago,
    Some six and thirty years or so,
    Another Bard your praise should sing
    When you had reached your sixtieth Spring.
    That sixtieth spring has come--to you,
    My Dearest Soul, the verse is due.
    Nor ever thine more fit t’inspire
    The heart’s delight, the Poet’s fire,
    Than Charms, unfading Charms, like yours,
    Than merit which the test endures
    Of health and sickness, smiles and tears,
    And all that chequers lengthened years.
    Nor will you frown, tho’ my prediction
    In one sole point turn out a fiction,
    And this so late reviving lay
    Raised to record your natal day
    Prove no strange minstrel’s ode or hymn,
    But the unaltered vows of him,
    Whose earliest and whose last emotion
    Has been and must be warm devotion
    To all the Charms he sees combined
    In thy dear frame and lovely Mind.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I write not, I, for prize or fame,
    Nor bays nor triumph is my aim;
    To you, My Love, my strains belong,
    To you I dedicate my song:
    And all my hope and all my due
    Is one kind happy smile from You.
    Content if on this blessed day
    My simple rugged lines convey
    One truth, which be it verse or prose,
    From my heart’s heart sincerely flows:
    ‘I loved you much at twenty-four,
    I love you better at threescore.’




                              APPENDIX B


The following letters from Mr. Campbell to Lord Holland, referring
to the first meeting of the Cortes at Cadiz, have been considered of
sufficient interest for publication.


                  _Mr. R. Campbell to Lord Holland._

                                             Cadiz, Sept. 26th, 1810.

    MY LORD,--I am just returned from the Isle of Leon where
    I had been to witness the opening of the Cortes, and am
    favoured with your Lordship’s letter of the 6th inst; the
    packet has orders to sail immediately upon receiving Mr.
    Wellesley’s despatches, which I am informed will be ready
    in less than an hour, so that I have only time to give your
    Lordship a very short and imperfect account of what has
    hitherto passed in the Cortes; such, however, as it is, I
    have no doubt but it will be interesting to your Lordship.

    The Cortes met, agreeably to the summons of convocation, in
    the Isle of Leon, on the 24th inst, and having taken the
    usual oaths, administered to them in an adjoining church
    by the Bishop of Orense, President of the Regency, they
    repaired in a Body to the _Theatre_ which had been fitted
    up for their reception, as the most convenient for _them_
    and the best adapted for the accommodation of the _public_
    of any place that could be selected in the Island. They
    were accompanied by a great concourse of people of all
    ranks, shouting, ‘Viva España, viva la nacion, y vivan
    los Padres de la Patria.’ After they were installed,
    the Regency who had accompanied them gave an account of
    their administration and made a formal demission of their
    authority in the hands of the Cortes, and then withdrew.

    I was not present during the whole of the sitting, which
    continued till 5 _o’clock_ in the morning, but the
    following is, I believe, a pretty correct account of the
    most important Decrees which were passed, some of which you
    will allow to be of _great importance indeed_, viz.:--

    The _sovereignty_ of the nation, now assembled in Cortes.
    The legislative power vested in them. The inviolability
    of the persons of the deputies. All the cessions made in
    Bayonne declared to be null and void, not only on account
    of the violence employed in obtaining them, but _chiefly_
    for having been made without the consent and contrary to
    the will of the Spanish nation so strongly pronounced.
    Ferdinand VII. declared to be King of Spain and the Indies.
    (The motion was, King and _Sovereign_, but the word
    _Sovereign_ was rejected.)

    The late Regency, for the present (_interinamente_) to
    exercise the executive power; they and the Ministers to
    be responsible to the Cortes for their conduct in the
    administration of public affairs and to grant no offices
    which were not absolutely and indispensably necessary in
    the actual circumstances of the nation.

    The Regency to take the usual oaths to the Cortes (which
    they did on the same evening).

    The Regency not to remove more than one league from the
    place where the Cortes shall be sitting.

    All officers, civil, military, and judiciary, confirmed in
    their appointments. The judiciary to confine themselves
    _strictly_ to their _judicial_ capacities.

    Everything was conducted with a greater degree of
    decorum than could have been expected, all circumstances
    considered. Your Lordship will be of opinion that it was
    a spectacle highly interesting to see a body of men thus
    suddenly assembled and unaccustomed to public business,
    discussing objects of the greatest magnitude with calmness
    and dignity and with as much confidence that they were
    laying the foundations of the independence, liberty,
    and happiness of their country as if there was not a
    Frenchman on this side of the Pyrenees, tho’ they were then
    deliberating with a French army in sight and almost within
    reach of their batteries.

    I have the strongest hopes that the meeting of the Cortes
    will produce the most favourable effects. It cannot fail
    to rouse every dormant energy of the nation; _here_ the
    enthusiasm is universal, and I am not afraid of its running
    into any of those horrible excesses which disgraced the
    French Revolution. The elections have fallen upon persons
    distinguished for talents, probity, and patriotism; this
    I know to be the case with respect to those deputies which
    have been chosen here, and I have reason to believe that
    it is _generally_ so. There is but one Grandee in the
    Cortes--Villafranca--who was chosen by the _Ayuntamiento_
    of Murcia. Infantado would have been chosen by the
    Emigrants from Madrid here. He had the greatest number of
    suffrages; but being only one of three, who were balloted
    for agreeably to the mode of election prescribed by the
    enclosed paper, the lot fell upon a _Relator_ of the
    Council of Castile, a very able and upright lawyer.

    A commission, or rather committee, was appointed yesterday
    to draw up a plan of the forms by which their future
    proceedings were to be regulated. We expect that a decree
    will be passed in a few days establishing the liberty of
    the press; the plan of it, I have reason to think, is
    now preparing. We expect likewise that a journal of the
    proceedings and debates of the Cortes will be published
    daily, and this, I hope, will be circulated, in thousands,
    all over the country occupied by the enemy, by means of
    the _guerrillas_ which are every day increasing in number,
    force, and audacity. I saw yesterday a respectable person
    who was in Madrid when the _Empecinado_ attacked the _Casa
    de campo_, and when Joseph and his suite fled in confusion
    and dismay from the playhouse. Very few of the French
    cabinet couriers escape the vigilance and boldness of the
    _guerrillas_. Another intercepted mail has just arrived
    here containing correspondence of a very interesting
    nature; it will be soon published.

    The Cortes will probably remove their sittings in a short
    time to Cadiz, where they will assemble in the church of
    St. Phelipe Neri, the place in Cadiz best adapted for
    the purpose. As it is not a parish church it will be
    ceded without difficulty by the confraternity to which
    it belongs. Your Lordship may remember that it is a
    handsome _rotundo_ of modern architecture, with capacious
    galleries. Above the altar of the principal chapel there
    is a celebrated ‘Conception’ of _Murillo_; I mention this
    circumstance to assist your memory in recollecting the
    place.

    I enclose a very well written address to the deputies of
    the Cortes which was published here three days before they
    met; the author, tho’ the initials of the name were not
    subjoined, your Lordship would readily know to be Quintana.
    He has not been elected for the Cortes. Capmany is one of
    the deputies for Catalonia.

    The last decree of the _Junta Central_ which you had the
    goodness to send me was not suppressed by their successors;
    it was circulated here in manuscript. I read it a few days
    after it was passed: it was not printed and published, but
    its not being so did not, in my opinion, arise from any
    improper motive. The truth is that the _Junta Central_
    were and still are held in such universal abhorrence
    that anything coming from them, were it ever so good in
    itself, would have been ill received by the public. The
    only member of that body to whom no public odium has
    attached is your friend Jovellanos. He has retired to some
    corner in Asturias; it was reported some weeks ago that
    he had been named deputy to the Cortes from some parts
    of that province, and the intelligence gave great and
    general satisfaction. Garay and a few others are still
    here, but seldom appear in public. Valdes is in Gibraltar.
    Tilly and Calvo close prisoners in the Castle of St.
    Sebastian. Villel in Catalonia, and the rest I know not
    where. Riquelme, who, to avoid the effects of the popular
    indignation, had taken refuge on board a Spanish frigate
    commanded by Dn. Raphael Lobo, was the only person killed
    by the fire of the French batteries on the Trocadero when
    the frigate, having been driven from her anchors during
    a violent storm, grounded within reach of the French
    batteries and was at last set on fire by red hot shot.

    I enclose a number of the _Conciso_ (a new paper published
    here) which has just come from the press; the account which
    it gives of the proceedings in the Cortes differs very
    little from what I have written above.

    The assembly of the Cortes, tho’ late, is a most fortunate
    circumstance; it affords the only hope of saving the
    nation. The single circumstance of the Regency having been
    appointed by the _Junta Central_, would for ever have
    prevented them from obtaining the confidence of the public.

    I beg to offer my best respects to Lady Holland and Mr.
    Allen, and have the honour to be, &c.

                                                       R. CAMPBELL.

    P.S.--Though the Cortes in a body are to have the
    _tratamiento of Majesty_, the individual members are to
    have no _tratamiento_ nor any badge of distinction as
    members of Cortes. When the Regency took the oaths to the
    Cortes on the evening of the 24th, the Bishop of Orense did
    not come, saying he was fatigued and much indisposed, and
    he has since declined to take the oaths from some _scruple
    of conscience_, of what nature we do not know. The Cortes
    were sitting yesterday in a secret committee of the whole,
    deliberating upon a communication from the Regency.


                  _Mr. R. Campbell to Lord Holland._

                                              Cadiz, Dec. 10, 1810.

    MY LORD,--Being much hurried at present I must refer your
    Lordship to the public reports for an account of the
    further proceedings of the Cortes and of the events which
    have lately taken place in this country. I shall only say
    in general that we are still full of confidence. A measure,
    which I have taken the liberty of strongly recommending to
    some of my friends among the deputies, will probably be
    moved in the Cortes this day or to-morrow. It is to pass
    a decree making it a fundamental law of the state that
    any King of Spain or Prince of the blood royal who shall
    marry a _foreigner_ without the consent of the Cortes,
    shall by that act forfeit his title to the crown. The
    subject of this decree, independent of its general policy,
    is immediately to anticipate any new trick or stratagem
    which Bonaparte may probably devise, should the campaign
    in Portugal prove, as we hope, signally disastrous to
    his arms, by marrying Ferdinand to a Frenchwoman or an
    Austrian, and bringing him to Spain as King, in order to
    create new factions and disunion. This law will probably be
    proposed by Arguelles, and I have little doubt will pass.

    Your Lordship will perceive from this that we are at
    present more afraid of the artifices than of the arms of
    Napoleon.

    Some discussion will likewise soon take place in the Cortes
    with respect to the assumption of the title of _Majesty_

    by them; a measure which, I was aware, would be liable
    to much misconstruction in England. I shall write your
    Lordship more fully on this and some other subjects by
    next packet; in the mean time, your Lordship may be assured
    that there was no intention, by the assumption of this
    title, to degrade the royal authority.

    I beg leave to offer my best respects to Lady Holland and
    Mr. Allen, and have the honour to be, &c.

                                                       R. CAMPBELL.


                  _Mr. R. Campbell to Lord Holland._

                                            Cadiz, Dec. 20th, 1810.

    MY LORD,--The decree which I mentioned in my last letter
    with respect to the marriage of the Princes of the Spanish
    Blood Royal was actually proposed by Capmany, and discussed
    on the 10th. Capmany’s motion was that no King of Spain
    or Prince of the blood royal should contract matrimony
    with _any person whatever_, without the consent of the
    Cortes lawfully assembled; this is more general and, as a
    fundamental Law of the State, more consistent, perhaps,
    with sound policy, than the decree to which I alluded. The
    motion was referred to the committee on the constitution,
    and I hope they will lose no time in deciding upon it.

    Such had been the shameful intriguing and trafficking for
    places and pensions, for titles and ribands and crosses
    and promotions in the army and navy, frequently conferred
    upon the most worthless individuals, during the government
    of the Central Junta and of the late Regency, that the
    _self-denying_ decree appears to me to have been absolutely
    necessary to give the Cortes that degree of public
    confidence and popularity which alone could render their
    labours of any benefit to the nation.

    With respect to the title of Majesty, I am convinced that,
    in assuming it, the Cortes had no intention to degrade
    the royal dignity and that no democratic views lurk under
    this measure. Your Lordship will be pleased to consider
    the very peculiar circumstances under which they met. The
    nation was _then_ for the first time in the history of the
    Monarchy represented by deputies that had the least shadow
    of a claim to fair or legitimate election; they had to
    give to their country what it never possessed before--a
    _Constitution_, by which the hitherto despotic power of
    the King should be limited, and which should be binding
    on him as well as on the people. They had to prescribe
    to him the conditions upon which the Spanish nation were
    willing that he should continue to wear the crown. It was
    necessary that, at the first moment of their meeting, they
    should make some kind of public and solemn expression of
    the sovereign and inherent rights of the nation, lawfully
    represented, to form and establish the fundamental laws of
    the State. The title of Majesty was therefore not assumed
    with levity; its expediency was maturely considered.
    It was requisite that the multitude and all ranks and
    classes of the State should at once receive the deepest
    impression that the authority and dignity of the _present
    extraordinary_ Cortes were paramount to every other; before
    which all other authorities and dignities must, for the
    present, bend. It was necessary, therefore, that they
    should be addressed in the language corresponding to the
    high dignity of their situation--they could not otherwise
    have taken or maintained possession of the lofty ground
    upon which they now stand, especially in a country where,
    more than in any other, respect and authority are connected
    in the minds of the vulgar with title and external
    appearance. Besides, the title of Majesty had just been
    given to the _Central Junta_ and to the late Regency; and
    if the Cortes had not assumed the same title, it might have
    been considered as a public acknowledgment of inferiority
    in power and dignity to these two bodies. Had the Cortes
    taken the title of _Highness_ and left that of _Majesty_
    with the _Regency_, how would it have sounded in the ears
    of a Spanish public that his _Majesty_ was nominated by
    and responsible for his conduct to his _Highness_? I have
    not heard it even insinuated that any future Cortes (or by
    whatever other appellation the elective representatives of
    the people shall be distinguished) ought to be addressed
    by the title of Majesty. This title, it is generally
    understood, when the Constitution is established,
    should belong to the King _alone_, as the hereditary
    representative of the power and Majesty of the nation.

    In addition to all this, your Lordship will have observed
    that the title of Majesty was more general in its
    application in Spain than it is in England. In England it
    belongs exclusively to the King; in Spain, it was likewise
    given to the _Camera del Consejo Real_ and to the _Consejo
    de Guerra_. I ought to beg your Lordship’s pardon for
    hazarding these hasty opinions, which I submit with great
    sincerity to your more enlightened judgment.

    A fungous growth of political pamphlets and periodical
    publications issue daily from the press. We have the
    _Conciso_, the _Tertulia_, the _Buen Español_, the
    political _Telescope_, and I believe the political
    _Microscope_ and the political _Spectacles_; none of these
    have any merit except the _Conciso_, which gives the best
    diary we have yet had of the proceedings of the Cortes;
    but we have likewise the _Semanario_, revived by Quintana,
    which maintains its ancient reputation, and the _Patriot in
    the Cortes_, as yet chiefly distinguished for its boldness.
    Some numbers of these last I shall do myself the pleasure
    to send to your Lordship by the first good opportunity.
    I should have requested of Mr. Wellesley or Mr. Vaughan
    to take charge of any parcel or packet for you, but they
    reside at present in the _Isla_, whither I seldom go; and
    which is so crowded that I could not procure in it a house
    or accommodation of any kind. We are and have been in daily
    expectation that the Cortes will transfer their sittings
    to this city. The Cortes have committed and are _daily_
    committing a great many errors; but they are the errors of
    inexperience, and as they have upright intentions and are
    not indocile they will, I hope, soon correct such mistakes
    as they may inadvertently fall into, more especially when
    the forms are once established which are to regulate
    their future proceedings; and I am happy to say that this
    necessary regulation, the want of which has been already on
    many occasions severely felt, will soon take place.

    I have seen exaggerated accounts in the English papers of
    the yellow fever which prevailed here; it was not virulent
    nor general, and has now, I believe, entirely vanished.

    The French have at last succeeded in throwing a few
    nine-inch shells within our walls from their battery on
    the _cabezuela of the Trocadero_. One fell near the signal
    tower, almost in the centre of the city, and distant from
    the _cabezuela_ about 2500 French _toises_, greater by
    200 _toises_ than any range of a shell formerly known.
    Not more than a dozen altogether fell within the walls;
    they fortunately did no damage and occasioned very little
    alarm. I am assured by Artillery officers that the charge
    of powder necessary to throw a shell to such a distance is
    so great, that after a few discharges the mortar will be
    rendered entirely useless. A few shells were first fired
    two or three days ago, a few more the next day, and they
    have since been silent. We are informed that one of their
    mortars burst.

    A general enlistment is now carrying on here and rigorously
    executing, of all unmarried men _without exception_
    from the age of 16 to 45. Men we can find in abundance,
    but where we can get the means of clothing, arming, and
    subsisting them, unless we receive very liberal aid from
    England, it is difficult for me to conceive; two days
    ago, notwithstanding every measure of economy that has
    been adopted and is adopting, there was not a dollar in
    the treasury. The Government had applied a few weeks ago
    to the _Junta_ of Cadiz for the loan of a million of
    dollars, to be repaid upon the arrival of the _Bulwark_
    from Vera Cruz; this the _Junta_ had the scandalous
    indecency to refuse, except upon the condition that the
    regulation and collection of the customs of the port of
    Cadiz should be committed exclusively to their management,
    with other stipulations, the effect of which would have
    been to erect the _Junta_ into a little petty sovereignty.
    This proposition was rejected with indignation, and the
    conduct of the _Junta_, upon this occasion, has justly
    rendered them extremely unpopular. Yesterday morning,
    the Government, being absolutely without a dollar, made
    application to the _Consulado_, and a meeting of the most
    respectable merchants being called most of whom never had
    any concern with the _Junta_, a great many very patriotic
    speeches were made, the million of dollars was immediately
    granted, without interest or condition of any kind and to
    be repaid whenever it was convenient for the Government.
    The _Bulwark_ fortunately arrived in the evening, but has
    not brought so much money as was expected, only a million
    and a half dollars for the public treasury and about two
    millions private property.

    I am sure I must have now tired your Lordship completely
    with this long and uninteresting letter, to which I shall
    here put a close, and have the honour to be most truly,

                        Your most obedt. Servt.

                                                       R. CAMPBELL.




                                 INDEX

          (_The figures in italics refer to the notes only_)


    Abbot, Charles, Speaker (afterwards Lord Colchester), and Public
        Debtors Bill, ii. 89, 90, 94, 95

    Abercorn, John James, 1st Marquess of, i. 201, 202, 257; ii. 56,
        67, 68, 69, 70

    Aboukir, battle of, ii. 31

    Adair, Sir Robert, i. 263; ii. 270, 274

    Adam, William, M.P., Attorney-General to Prince of Wales, ii.
     _229_, 273, 274, 283, 284

    Adderley, Mr., i. _235_, 237, 243, 245, 252, 253, 254, 265, 266,
        269, 271, 273, 274, 276, 279

    Addington’s Administration, ii. 280

    Addington, Henry (Viscount Sidmouth), ii. 132, 147, 202, _210_,
        211;
      and Catholic Emancipation Bill, ii. 213–19, 221, 223

    Addison, Joseph, ii. 64–5

    Affleck, Sir Gilbert, i. 147; ii. 104

    Alfieri, Vittorio, i. 48, 56, 140, 145

    Ali Pacha, ii. 173

    Allen, Dr. John, ii. 280

    Amelia, Princess, her death, ii. 265, 266

    American Treaty, the, ii. 194

    Amherst, William Pitt (afterwards Earl Amherst), i. 129, 264; ii.
        29, _264_

    Amiens, Treaty of, ii. _195_, 237

    Andover, Viscount, his death, ii. 43

    _Annual Register_, the, i. _226_, _237_; ii. _30_, _41_, _106_,
       _126_, _163_, _175_, _178_

    _Anti-Jacobin_, the, i. 7, 205, 243; ii. _42_

    Apodaca, Admiral, ii. 245, 246

    Armstead, Mrs., _see_ Mrs. C. J. Fox

    Assessed Taxes, i. _164_, 165, 169, 170

    Association of the Friends of the People, i. 14, 15, 101, 102

    Aston, Col. Harvey, i. 261

    Auckland, Lord, i. 101, 236; ii. 71, 77, 96, 173–4, 227;
      and the Divorce Bill, ii. 77, 96

    Auerstadt, battle of, ii. _187_

    Augustus, Prince Frederick, Duke of Sussex, i. 8, 35, 47; ii. 82,
        84

    Austerlitz, battle of, ii. _161_


    Baia, i. 23–4

    Balbi, Comtesse de, i. 7, 86

    Bathurst, Rt. Hon. Charles Bragge, ii. _222_, 223

    Beauchamp, Lady (afterwards Lady Hertford, _q.v._), i. 96

    Beauclerk, Charles George, i. 124, 233, 234, 235, 244;
      his disposition, i. 121, 122, 256; ii. 34, 80

    Beauclerk, Mrs., i. 232, 233; ii. 34, 50, 80;
      character, i. 234, 235, 256;
      marriage, i. 244

    Bedford, Francis Russell, 5th Duke of, i. 98; ii. _74_, 87;
      his manner and qualities, i. 270;
      on the Divorce Bill, ii. 78–9;
      builds Russell Square, ii. 106 and note;
      his death, ii. 149

    Bedford, John Russell, 6th Duke of, in Ireland, ii. 199, 200, 225

    Belgrave, Robert Grosvenor, Viscount (afterwards 1st Marquess of
        Westminster), and Sunday newspapers, i. 258

    Belsham, William, his _History of Great Britain_, ii. 236, 244–5

    Bentinck, Lord William Cavendish, ii. 290, 291

    Berington, Father Joseph, ii. 247–8

    Berkeley, Frederick Augustus, 5th Earl of, i. 262; ii. 82

    Berthier, General, i. 200–1

    Bessborough, Lady, i. 54–5, 122, 124, 126;
      and Lady Ann Hatton, ii. 69

    Biddulph, Mr., his Committee on Public Expenditure, ii. 206–7

    Bojanowitz, Mme., and Lord Thanet, i. _233_, 248; ii. 102

    Bonaparte, Jerome, ii. 178

    Bonaparte, Joseph, i. _175_, 200; ii. 246

    Bonaparte, Mme. (Josephine), i. 200–1

    Bonaparte, Napoleon, _see under_ Napoleon

    Bordeaux, Jérôme de Cicé, Archbishop of, ii. 22

    Boringdon, Lord (afterwards 1st Earl of Morley), i. 190, 241–2; ii.
        19;
      and Duke of Somerset, ii. 46

    Boscovitch, Roger Joseph, i. 19

    Bouillé, Marquis de, i. _151_, 152, 153

    Bragge, Rt. Hon. Charles, _see_ Bathurst

    Bristol, Frederick Augustus, 4th Earl of, and Bishop of Derry, i.
        141, 169, 242;
      and Lady Holland’s portrait, i. 138, 142;
      prisoner in Milan, i. 219

    Brougham, Henry, Lord, on C. J. Fox’s writings, ii. _58_

    Browne, William George, i. 33, 172–3, 207–8

    Brunswick, Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of, his manifesto, i. 14

    Buenos Ayres, ii. _185_, 189, 192, 203–4

    Buller, Mr. Justice, i. 184–5, 186, 233

    Burdett, Sir Francis, i. 251; ii. 8, 50–1, 136

    Burke, Edmund, on capture of Toulon, i. 97

    Burr, Aaron, ii. 190–1

    Busaco, battle of, ii. 264


    Caffarelli, Charles Ambroise de, ii. 153–4

    Calonne, Charles Alexandre de, i. _231_; ii. 34, 36–7, 160

    Cambridge, Prince Adolphus Frederick, Duke of, ii. _113_, 114

    Camden, Lord, Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, i. _188_, 189, 190

    Camelford, Lord, on La Fayette, i. 71

    Campbell, R., his letters to Lord Holland on the opening of the
        Cortes, Appendix B, ii. 297–305

    Camperdown, battle of, i. _148_

    Campo Formio, treaty of, i. _148_

    Canning, George, i. 123, 216–18, 239, 257, 259, 265, 273, 274, 277;
        ii. 52, 98, 222, 248, 277, 288;
      his Preface to the _Intercepted Letters_, ii. 44;
      and Lord Grenville, ii. 208, 210, 211, 285–7;
      and Danish Expedition, ii. 239–40;
      duel with Lord Castlereagh, ii. 247

    Canterbury, Charles Manners-Sutton, Archbishop of, ii. 226

    Carlisle, Frederick, 5th Earl of, i. _194_, 267; ii. 48;
      and Lord Kenyon, ii. 93, 95–6

    Caroline, Princess, _see_ Wales

    Castlereagh, Viscount, Chief Secretary in Ireland, i. 206; ii. 254,
        280;
      his duel with Mr. Canning, ii. 247;
      his principles, ii. 277–8

    Catholic Emancipation Question, the, ii. 128, _199–200_, 201–5,
        213–17;
      Lord Holland in favour of, ii. 76;
      Bill withdrawn, ii. 218–20

    Chaplin, Thomas, ii. 15, 104–5

    Charlotte, Queen, her letter to Prince of Wales, ii. 289

    Clairon, Mlle., her _Memoirs_, i. 247–8

    Clare, John Fitzgibbon, Earl of, in Ireland, ii. 131

    Clarke, General (afterwards Duc de Feltre), and peace negotiations,
        ii. 168, 175–6

    Clarke, Mrs., ii. _282_

    Cockburn, Capt. (afterwards Admiral Sir George), ii. 292

    Coigny, Mme. de, i. _237_; ii. 150;
      her witticisms quoted, i. 245; ii. 41–2, 49

    Coke, Thomas William (afterwards Earl of Leicester), ii. 193, 286

    Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, writes against C. J. Fox, ii. 237–8

    Copley, Sir Lionel, i. 232, 256–7

    Cornwallis, Charles, 2nd Earl and 1st Marquess, i. _115_;
      in Ireland, i. 190; ii. 131

    Cornwallis, Admiral the Hon. William, ii. 132–3

    Corresponding Society, the, i. 206, 250

    Corsica, i. 120

    Cortes, first meeting of the, ii. 270–1;
      Appendix B, 297–305

    _Courier_, the, i. 258; ii. 237

    Cowper, William, i. 125

    _Creevey Papers_, ii. _253_

    Cumberland, Duke of, ii. 224, 290

    Curran, John Philpot, ii. 33

    Custine, General, i. _78_, 82

    Czartorisky, Adam Georges, ii. 166


    D’Albany, Comtesse (Princesse de Stolberg), i. 48, 135, 140

    Dalton, General, i. 92, 93

    Dampierre, General, his monument, i. 88–9

    D’Armfeldt, Baron, i. 46–7, 49–50, 51, 52–3, 55, 56, 123–4

    Darnley, John, 4th Earl of, i. 104, 277

    D’Artois, Comte, i. 198;
      and Mr. Pitt, ii. 50–1

    Devonshire, Georgiana, Duchess of, i. 5, 26, 27, 97, 105, 171, 244

    Digby, Edward, 2nd Earl of, i. 122, 276

    Divorce Bill, the, ii. 77, 93;
      Duke of Bedford on, ii. 78–9;
      passed House of Lords, ii. 84;
      rejected by Commons, ii. 96

    Dom John, Regent of Portugal, ii. _261_

    D’Oubril, M., and peace negotiations, ii. 162–3, 165, 166, 168, 173

    Drummond, Sir William, and Sicily, ii. 211–12

    Dumont, Pierre Etienne Louis, i. 229, 234, 236;
      his conversation, ii. 11, 23–4, 39

    Dumouriez, General, i. _53_, 59, 81, 85, 87, 150–1; ii. 110

    Duncan, Admiral, i. 160–1

    Dundas, Henry (afterwards 1st Viscount Melville), i. 72, 102, 231;
        ii. 191, 223, 227

    Dunkirk, siege of, i. 92–3

    Dupont, General, in Andalusia, ii. 242, 245

    Dutch Expedition, the, ii. 23, 32, 35


    Eden, William Frederick, ii. 254

    Egremont, George, 3rd Earl of, i. 103; ii. 104, 105

    El Arish, treaty of, ii. _72_

    Eldon, John, 1st Earl of, ii. 93;
      and George III., ii. _192_, 193, 223, 224

    Elgin, Thomas, 7th Earl of, i. 86, 87, 104, 105, 146

    Elliot, Sir Gilbert (afterwards Lord Minto), i. 99–100, 118;
      and Toulon, i. 98, 119;
      and Corsica, i. 120;
      his character, i. 161–2;
      on Emma, Lady Hamilton, i. _242_;
      Governor-General of India, ii. 196;
      and the Prince of Wales, ii. 198

    Elliot, Hugh, British Minister in Dresden, i. 13, 50; ii. 121

    Ellis, Charles Rose, i. 5, 6, 15, 218, 242

    Erskine, Thomas, 1st Lord, i. 102, 164; ii. 202;
      on religion, ii. 60;
      on Serjeant Lens, ii. 94


    Fagniani, Maria (afterwards Lady Hertford), ii. _163_

    Farquhar, Sir Walter, ii. 49, 135

    Faulkner, Thomas, his _History of Kensington_ quoted, ii. 63

    Ferdinand III. of Tuscany, i. 48–9

    Ferdinand IV. of Naples, i. 26, 28, 29

    Fergusson, Robert Cultar, i. _233_, _246_, 247, 250, 251, 254, 262;
        ii. 103

    Fersen, M. de, i. 87

    Fingall, Arthur James, 8th Earl of, and Catholic Question, ii. 205

    Fitzgerald, Lady Edward (Pamela), i. 181–2, 188, 208

    Fitzgerald, Lord Edward, i. 181, 182, 260;
      his arrest, i. 185;
      his death, i. 187, 189;
      and character, i. 188

    Fitzgerald, Lord Henry, i. 112, 186, 188, 189, 273

    Fitzgerald, Lady Lucy, i. _234_, 235–6, 244, 246, 254

    Fitzherbert, Mrs., i. 245, 258; ii. 49, 83

    Fitzpatrick, General, i. 201, 254, 255–6; ii. 57, 58–9, 148;
      his epigrams, i. 267–8;
      letters to Lord Kenyon, ii. 48;
      on C. J. Fox, ii. 84–5

    Fitzwilliam, William, 4th Earl, i. 181; ii. 127;
      and Prince of Wales, ii. 131

    Flahault, Mme. de, ii. 155–6

    Fontana, Felix, i. 51–2, 118, 139;
      his _homme de bois_, i. 117

    Forfeiture Bill, the, i. 275

    Fox, Miss, i. 127, 147, 254, 256;
      on Mrs. Fox, i. _149_

    Fox, C. J., Mrs., i. 149, 150, 228; ii. 180, 181

    Fox, Charles James, and the Association, i. _14_, _15_, 102;
      his opposition to the war, i. 97;
      and Sir Gilbert Elliot, i. 99–100;
      and Mr. Grey, i. 100–1;
      and Lord E. Fitzgerald, i. 186;
      and Lord Thanet’s case, i. 246;
      and Mr. Francis, i. 268, 269;
      and peace negotiations, ii. 46–8, 163–6;
      his _History of the Revolution_, ii. 57–8, 78;
      his _Memorials and Correspondence_, ii. _140_;
      and secession, i. 148, 163; ii. 74;
      and Napoleon, ii. 150;
      on Lord Holland’s debut in House of Lords, i. _169_;
      his illness, ii. 167, 169, 171–5, 178, 179;
      death, ii. 180–1;
      and funeral, ii. 187;
      referred to, i. 69, 70, 121, 149, 153, 165, 177, 214, 227–8; ii.
          44, 45, 126

    Fox, the Hon. Charles Richard (afterwards General), i. 267; ii. 5,
        7, 8, 121, 148–9, 236, 252, 259, 272

    Fox, the Hon. Georgina Anne, ii. 247

    Fox, the Hon. Henry Edward (afterwards 4th Lord Holland), ii.
        234–5, 244

    Fox, General the Hon. H. E., ii. 26, 42

    Fox, the Hon. Stephen, i. 249; ii. 25, 125

    Francis, Sir Philip, i. 230, 255; ii. 78, 141;
      on C. J. Fox, i. 268–9

    Frederick William II., i. 168

    Frederick William III., i. _167_, 168; ii. 118, _187_, 188

    Frere, Bartholomew, i. _265_; ii. 186, 293

    Frere, John Hookham, succeeds Canning as Under-Secretary, i. 243,
        265

    Freyne, Manuel, General, ii. 245

    _Further Memoirs of the Whig Party_, Lord Holland’s, ii. _284_


    Genlis, Mme. de, ii. 110–11

    George III., i. 97; ii. 130, 268;
      fired at, ii. 80;
      his coolness, ii. 81, 89;
      his madness, ii. 131, 265, 275, 276;
      and Catholic Emancipation Question, ii. 128, _199_, 201–3,
          214–21, 224;
      on the death of C. J. Fox, ii. 182;
      and Lord Eldon, ii. _192_, 193

    Gibbon, Edward, i. 2, 69, 96–7; ii. 37, 39

    Godoy, Manuel de (Prince of the Peace), ii. 172, 243

    Grattan, Henry, arrested, i. 191, 192

    Grenville, Rt. Hon. Thomas, i. 226; ii. 182;
      and ‘Virtuous Triumvirate,’ i. 118–9

    Grenville, William Wyndham, Lord, i. _72_; ii. _147_, 170, 171,
        269–70, 284, 286, 287;
      resigns office, ii. 128, 129;
      and Catholic Emancipation Bill, ii. 213, 215, 217, 219, 221;
      Chancellor of Oxford, ii. 249, 256;
      and Lord Buckingham, ii. 256;
      and the Regency, ii. 267, 281–4;
      and the Auditorship, ii. 285–8

    Grey, Charles (afterwards Viscount Howick and 2nd Earl Grey), his
        character, i. 98, 100–2, 171;
      and Prince of Wales, i. 178, 190–1; ii. 282, 283;
      and secession, i. 215, 270; ii. 74;
      and Parliamentary Reform, ii. 73;
      and Mr. Tierney, ii. 137–140;
      his plans for an Administration, ii. 171;
      and the Foreign Office, ii. 184, 185;
      and Catholic Emancipation, ii. _200_, 201, 203, 214, 216, 217;
      and Mr. Whitbread, ii. 245;
      and Lord Grenville, ii. 284–8;
      referred to, i. 210, 211, 214; ii. 172, 178, 181, 197, 224–5, 227, 269

    Gustavus III. of Sweden, i. _46_, 49–50

    Gustavus IV. of Sweden, ii. 188–9, 279


    Halford, Sir Henry (Dr. Vaughan), influences Prince of Wales, ii.
        290

    Hamilton, Emma, Lady, i. 143, 242–3; ii. 13

    Hamilton, Sir William, i. 123, 143, 219, 243

    Hardwicke, Philip, 3rd Earl of, ii. 223–7

    Hare, James, i. 204, 223, 226; ii. 53;
      and Lord Macartney, i. 241;
      on Sheridan, i. 224

    Hatton, Lady Ann (afterwards Lady Abercorn), i. _55_, 122; ii. 56,
        67, 69

    Hertford, Lady, ii. _163_;
      and Prince of Wales, ii. 275;
      _see_ Beauchamp

    Hervey, John Augustus, Lord, i. 47, 54, 103, 112, 115–16

    Hobart, Robert, Lord (afterwards 4th Earl of Buckingham), i. 236–7,
        243, 257

    Hobhouse, Sir Benjamin, ii. 55

    Holland House, i. 181;
      its history, ii. 62–6

    Holland, Henry Richard Vassall, 3rd Lord:
      meets Lady Webster, i. 116;
      marriage, i. 147;
      his character, i. 121; ii. 58;
      his speech on Assessed Taxes, i. 169;
      on Land Tax, i. 189;
      on case of Benjamin Flower, i. 248–9;
      on Russian Subsidy, i. 264–5;
      his manner of speaking, i. 183;
      and Prince of Wales, i. 178;
      and Lord E. Fitzgerald, i. 186;
      and Lord Lansdown, i. 221;
      and Lord Thanet, i. 250, 269;
      and Mr. Adderley, i. 273;
      and Lord Sidmouth, ii. 217;
      and peace negotiations, ii. 29–30, 31, 44–5;
      and the Divorce Bill, ii. 77;
      and Public Debtors Bill, ii. 90;
      and Catholic Emancipation Bill, ii. 76, 201–3, 215–16;
      and Jacobinical Party, ii. 101–2;
      his _Foreign Reminiscences_, i. _231_;
      at Court, i. 253–4;
      and the mission to Paris, ii. 167, 168;
      successor to C. J. Fox, ii. 170, 171;
      Commissioner on American Question, ii. 173, 174;
      Privy Seal, ii. _182_, 183, 186, 187;
      advice to Prince of Wales, ii. 197–8;
      Recorder of Nottingham, ii. 249;
      his lines ‘To a Lady on Her Birthday,’ i. 130, Appendix A, 294–6

    Holland, Elizabeth, Lady:
      on Sir Godfrey Webster, i. 6, 30, 33, 38, 42–3, 53, 68, 83, 92,
          159;
      on his death, ii. 90–1;
      her marriage with Sir G. Webster annulled, i. 147;
      on Lord Holland, i. 117, 125, 159, 166, 170, 183, 265;
      on the Papal Government, i. 174–5;
      on Lord E. Fitzgerald’s arrest, i. 187, _188_;
      on Napoleon in Egypt, i. 199–201;
      on cliques, i. 257;
      on Harriet Webster, i. 263–4;
      on the death of C. J. Fox, ii. 179–182;
      her early education, i. 158–9;
      her reading, and studies, i. 5, 7, 130, 173, 192, 199, 213,
          215–16; ii. 24, 37, 41, 61;
      her criticisms on art, i. 18, 19, 32–8, 48, 84–5, 132, 134,
          137–8, 140, 141–2; ii. 151–2, 250–1

    Holroyd, Maria Josepha, on Lady Webster, i. 3

    Hood, Admiral Lord, at Toulon, i. _98_, 115, 119, 120

    Horner, Francis, on the Regency, ii. 280

    Horsley, Samuel, Bishop of Rochester, and the Divorce Bill, i.
        _86–7_; ii. 96

    Howick, Lord, _see_ Grey, Charles

    Humanitarians, the, ii. 55

    Huskisson, William, _The Depreciation of the Currency_, ii. 272


    Ingenhousz, John, i. 205, 273; ii. 11;
      his death, ii. 16–17

    _Intercepted Letters_, the, i. 200; ii. 44, 57

    Ireland, civil war in, i. 190

    Italinski, M., Russian Secretary at Naples, i. _16_, 27, 29, 122,
        123, 124;
      and Lady Holland’s portrait, i. 138, 142


    Jamaica, ii. 51

    Jekyll, Joseph, i. _175_, 204, 254; ii. 24, 129

    Jemappes, battle of, i. 87

    Jena, battle of, ii. _187_

    Jenkins, Thomas, i. _31_

    Johnson, Dr. Samuel, i. 72; ii. 65


    Kenyon, Lord Justice, i. 204, 246, 248;
      and Mr. Wakefield, i. 241;
      and Lord Holland, i. 249;
      and General Fitzpatrick, ii. 48;
      and Lord Carlisle, ii. 93, 95–6

    King, Peter, 7th Lord, ii. 27–8, 45

    Knight, Richard Payne, ii. _8_, 9, 79, 136–7


    La Fayette, Marquis de, i. 71, 72, 105, 151, 152, 208

    Lally-Tollendal, Comte de, ii. 155

    Lamb, Hon. William (afterwards 2nd Viscount Melbourne), i. 225; ii.
        100, 280

    Landau, siege of, i. 109, 114

    Lansdown, William Petty, 1st Marquess of, i. 100, 127, 191,
        209–211, 239, 245;
      his character, i. 175–7;
      and Lord Wycombe, i. 209–10;
      and Lord Holland, i. 221; ii. 76;
      on the Fitzgerald Attainder Bill, i. 231;
      and Dr. Ingenhousz, ii. 11, 16–17

    Lansdowne, John, 2nd Marquess of, _see_ Wycombe, Lord

    Lauderdale, James, 8th Earl of, i. 164–5, 198, 227, 270–1, 272; ii.
        162, 183, 268;
      and Association of the Friends of the People, i. 101;
      on Mr. Canning, i. _217_;
      peace negotiator at Paris, ii. 167, 169, 172, 173, 175–9, 185,
          191, 195

    Law, Edward (afterwards Lord Ellenborough), i. 246–7; ii. 103

    Leinster, Duchess of, i. 232, 234, 236, 240, 244

    Lennox, Lady Sarah, at Holland House, ii. 66

    Lens, Serjeant, and Norfolk Committee, ii. 194, 197, 204

    Leveson-Gower, Lord Granville (afterwards 1st Earl Granville), i.
        116, 121, 167; ii. 32–3, 253;
      his debut in House of Lords, i. 213;
      and the Czar, ii. 236

    Lewis, Matthew Gregory (‘Monk’), _The Monk_, i. 166–7;
      and Sheridan, i. 184;
      his translation of Juvenal, i. 224–5;
      _Alonzo and Imogene_, i. 239;
      _Reflections in a Royal Burying-ground_, ii. 39;
      and Duke of Somerset, ii. 45–6, 60;
      _Address from Friendship to Youth_, ii. 74–5, 87

    Lille, Abbé de, ii. 67–8

    Lima, M. de, ii. 176

    Lisbon, departure of Portuguese Royal Family from, ii. 261–2

    Llandaff, Richard Watson, Bishop of, and Mr. Wakefield, i. 179;
      and Benjamin Flower, i. 248–9

    Lorne, George William, Marquess of (afterwards 6th Duke of Argyll),
        i. 199, 233; ii. 46

    Louis XVIII., i. 145, 229

    Lucchesini, M., ii. _184_, _187_

    Ludlow, Edmund, at Vevey, i. 69


    Macartney, George, 1st Earl, i. 136, 228–9, 272; ii. 30;
      on Warren Hastings, i. 240;
      and Mr. Hare, i. 241

    Macdonald, General, ii. 48–9

    Mackintosh, Sir James, his principles, i. 251–2;
      his _History of Holland House_, ii. _63_

    MacMahon, Col., ii. 273, 278

    Malherbe, his _Consolation_, i. 183

    Malmesbury, James, 1st Earl of, i. 104, 105–6, 153, 169

    Manfredini, Prime Minister of Tuscany, i. _48_, 49, 54, 114, 145

    Marat, assassination of, i. 71, 72

    Marengo, battle of, ii. _85_

    Marie Antoinette, Queen, i. 85, 87

    Marlborough, Sarah, Duchess of, her vindication, i. 192–4

    Marsh, Rev. Matthew, i. 122, 216, 244–5, 246

    Martial Law Bill, Protest against, ii. 140–1

    Masséna, General, ii. _30_, _264_, 265

    Matarosa (Count Torreno), ii. 245

    Maurice, Thomas, his _Indian Antiquities_, i. 275

    Mayence, siege of, i. 78–80, 81–3

    _Memoirs of the Whig Party_, Lord Holland’s, i. _47_; ii. _61_,
        _121_, _168_, _183_, _200_, _235_

    Mexico, Commission to, ii. 292

    _Microcosm_, the, i. 13, _265–6_

    Millar, Professor John, ii. 100

    Milton, John, quoted, i. 130

    Minto, Lord. _See_ Elliot, Sir Gilbert

    _Miscellaneous Reminiscences_, Lord Holland’s, i. _265_

    Moira, Francis Rawdon, 2nd Earl of, i. 105, 109, 114–15, 178, 222;
        ii. 137, 284;
      his character, i. 165–6;
      and Duc de Luxembourg, i. 203–4;
      discontented with his party, ii. 195–6, 222;
      and Prince of Wales, ii. 268–9, 283

    Monroe, James, ii. 174, 209

    Moore, Capt. (afterwards Admiral Sir Graham), ii. 261

    Morla, Don Thomas, succeeds Solano at Cadiz, ii. 242

    _Morning Post_, the, ii. 237

    Morpeth, George, Viscount (afterwards 6th Earl of Carlisle), i. 70,
        122, 218; ii. 82, 134;
      on Arthur O’Connor, i. 186;
      his qualities, i. 238–9;
      and negotiations with Prussia, ii. 186

    Morris, Capt. Charles, ii. 11

    Murat, General, massacre at Madrid, ii. _241_;
      and King of Prussia, ii. 183–4

    Murray, Lady Augusta, i. _35_

    Mutiny Bill, the, in Ireland, ii. _199_, 200, 201, 213, 214, 216,
        218


    Naples, i. 15–16, 220; ii. 12–13

    Napoleon Bonaparte, ii. 51, 56, 85, 109, _110_, 151, 153, _187_;
      in Egypt, i. 199–201; ii. 42;
      and Sir Sidney Smith, ii. 12, 31;
      Grand Consul, ii. 40;
      and Mme. de Staël, ii. 101;
      attempted assassination of, ii. 142–4;
      receives C. J. Fox, ii. 150;
      and Russian Treaty, ii. 169

    National Defence Fund, i. _170_

    Nelson, Lord, at Naples, ii. 12

    Nepean, Evan, ii. 27

    Nile, battle of the, i. _199_

    Norfolk, Charles, 11th Duke of, ii. 9–10;
      his seditious speech, i. 177, 191

    Northumberland, Duke of, and Prince of Wales, i. 179–80

    Nugent, Baroness (formerly Lady Buckingham), and George III., ii.
        130


    O’Coigly, James, in court, i. 185

    O’Connor, Arthur, trial of, and attempted rescue, i. 184–6, 233,
        246–7;
      and Lady Lucy Fitzgerald, i. 235–6

    O’Hara, General, at Toulon, i. _98_, 108, 113

    Ossulston, Charles Augustus, Lord, i. _272_, 275

    Ostrach, battle of, i. _237_

    Oxford, Lady, ii. 8–9, 136–7


    Paget, Sir Arthur, ii. 235

    Park, Mungo, i. 172, 213

    Parr, Dr., i. 230; ii. 18, 72, 79

    Pelham, Hon. Thomas (afterwards 2nd Earl of Chichester), i. 1, 13,
        47, 54, 96, 97–8;
      his letter on the Association, i. _15_;
      and siege of Dunkirk, i. 104;
      and ‘Virtuous Triumvirate,’ i. 118–19;
      resigns the Irish Secretaryship, i. 206;
      Secretary of State, ii. 147–8

    Perceval, Spencer, speaks against C. J. Fox, ii. 196–7;
      the Prince of Wales and, ii. 276, 280, 289, 290

    Petty, Lord Henry (afterwards 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne), i. 176;
        ii. 54, 186, 208, 211;
      his character, ii. 100–1;
      and Lord Wycombe’s will, ii. 247

    Piron, M., i. 202–3, 212–13

    Pitt, William, i. 153, 267;
      and Mr. Grey, i. 100–1;
      and the Coalition, i. 102;
      and Lord Abercorn, i. 202;
      and the Union, i. 220;
      on Mr. Tierney, ii. 50–1;
      resigns office, ii. 128–9

    Pius VI., Pope, i. 125

    Plymouth, Sarah, Lady (afterwards Lady Amherst), i. 16, _20_, 29,
        122, 123; ii. 7, 264

    Polignac, Duchesse de, i. 111–12

    Pollen, ‘Prodigy,’ i. 222–3

    Pondicherry, siege of, i. 114–15, 116

    Ponsonby, Rt. Hon. George, ii. _34_, 225, 254;
      elected for Wicklow, ii. 133–4;
      Leader of the Opposition, ii. 235;
      and Danish Expedition, ii. 239

    Ponsonby, John, 2nd Baron, his letters to Lord Howick, ii. 205–6;
      and the Irish Catholics, ii. 212, 223, 225

    Popham, Admiral Sir Home, and capture of Buenos Ayres, ii. _185_,
        _189_, 192

    Portland, William Henry Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of, ii. 223,
        225, 291;
      and Sir Gilbert Elliot, i. 99–100;
      supports the war, i. 118;
      at the Home Office, i. 182, 186;
      and Henry Grattan, i. 191–2

    Presburg, treaty of, ii. _161_, 176, 177

    Priestley, Joseph, ii. 55

    Prussia, Prince Ferdinand Augustus of, ii. 117

    Prussia, Prince Henry of, his qualities, ii. 119–120

    Public Debtors Bill, ii. _89_, 90, 94–5


    Queensberry, William, 4th Duke of, ii. 281

    Quesnoy, siege of, i. 53, 89–90, _93_


    Rastadt, murder of French Deputies at, i. 249, 250

    Reynolds, Sir Joshua, ii. 244

    Richmond, Charles, 3rd Duke of, and Duke of York, i. 94;
      and Lord E. Fitzgerald, i. 188;
      and Lady Lucy Fitzgerald, i. 235–6;
      his death, ii. 191–2

    Rose, Mr., and Abolition of Slave Trade, ii. 205

    Rosslyn, James, 2nd Earl of, and Mission to Lisbon, ii. 167, 171,
        175

    Royal Institution, the, ii. _52_, 60–1

    Rumford, Count von (Sir Benjamin Thompson), Prime Minister of
        Bavaria, i. 12, 59, 108;
      in England, i. 206–7, 279; ii. 52


    St. Januarius, ceremony of the liquefaction of blood of, i. 21

    St. Vincent, Admiral Viscount (Sir John Jervis), and Admiral
        Duncan, i. 160–1;
      First Lord of the Admiralty, ii. 132;
      and Mission to Portugal, ii. 162, 174–5

    San Leucio, Colony of, i. 27–8

    Santa Croce, Princess, i. 34, 35, 125

    Scarlett, James (afterwards Lord Abinger), ii. 38

    Scott, Sir William, on Divorce Bill, ii. 88

    Selwyn, George, ii. 66

    Sheffield, John Baker Holroyd, Lord, i. _2_, 97

    Sheridan, Richard Brinsley, i. 98, 102, 123, 249, 255, 258, 278–9;
        ii. 55;
      and ‘Monk’ Lewis, i. 184;
      and Mr. Canning, i. 217;
      and Mr. Tierney, i. 220–1;
      and Prince of Wales, i. 221–2; ii. 283–4;
      James Hare on, i. 224;
      and the O’Connor trial, i. 246–7;
      and _Pizarro_, i. 255;
      and George III., ii. 81;
      and Abbot’s Bill, ii. 95;
      and Divorce Bill, ii. 96;
      on the successor to C. J. Fox, ii. 170;
      his intrigues, ii. 172–3

    Sheridan, Charles Francis, i. 268, 274–5

    Sicily, ii. 164–5, 263–4, 290–1

    Sidmouth, Lord, _see_ Addington, Henry

    Simon, General, ii. 265

    Slavery Bill, the, i. 271, 275; ii. 205

    Smith, Robert Percy (‘Bobus’), i. 248, 275;
      his marriage, i. 163;
      and Lord Lansdown, i. 210;
      his vaunted independence, ii. 17

    Smith, Sir Sidney, and Napoleon, ii. 12, 31;
      and treaty of El Arish, ii. 72;
      takes Capri, ii. 167;
      in Sicily, ii. 212

    Solano, M., Governor of Cadiz, his murder, ii. 240–2, 246

    Somerset, Edward Adolphus, 11th Duke of, his character, ii. 21–2;
      and ‘Monk’ Lewis, ii. 45–6, 60

    Southey, Robert, ii. 231–2, 257

    Spencer, George John, 2nd Earl, and Catholic Emancipation Bill, ii.
        221, 223

    Spencer, Lord Henry, i. 257; ii. 19;
      at the Hague, i. 13, 86;
      ordered to Stockholm, i. 61, 97;
      in Parliament, i. 123;
      on Baron d’Armfeldt, i. 124

    Staël, Mme. de, and Talleyrand, ii. 57;
      and Napoleon, ii. 101

    Stahremberg, Prince, ii. 236–7, 254–5

    Stanhope, Charles, 3rd Earl of, ii. 102

    Strangford, Lord, at Lisbon, ii. 261

    Stroganoff, M., Russian Ambassador in England, ii. _168_, 177, 178


    Talleyrand, M., his sarcasms, ii. 57;
      and peace negotiations, ii. 163–5, 176–7

    Tandy, James Napper, ii. 109

    Thanet, Lord, indicted for attempting to rescue Arthur O’Connor, i.
        233, 241, 248;
      Sheridan’s evidence, i. 246–7;
      desires a pardon, i. 249–250, 251;
      sentenced to the Tower, i. 262, 269;
      released, ii. 102;
      at Appleby, ii. 232

    Thurlow, Lord, on Triple Assessments, i. 164;
      and Lord Auckland, ii. 71

    Tierney, George, i. 171–2, 179, 241, 260–1, 272, 274, 278; ii. 76;
      on Arthur O’Connor, i. 203;
      and Mr. Nicholl, i. 205;
      his speech on the Income Bill, i. 221;
      speech on Finance, i. 265;
      and Evan Nepean, ii. 27;
      his loyalty questioned, ii. 50–1, 53;
      his parody on Lewis’s _Address from Friendship to Youth_, ii. 75;
      and Mr. Grey, ii. 137–140

    Tilsit, treaty of, ii. _173_, 230

    Tooke, Horne, his trial, i. _186_, 247; ii. 48;
      at Westminster, ii. 52–3;
      elected for Old Sarum, ii. 134, 140;
      on C. J. Fox, ii. 146

    Toulon, siege of, i. _98_, 99, 108, 112, 113, 115

    Treating Act, the, Messrs. Windham and Coke and, ii. 193, 194

    Trebbia, battle of, i. 278

    Turkey, the war with Russia, ii. 209

    Tyrwhitt, Sir Thomas, ii. 266–7


    Valenciennes, siege of, i. 54, 70–3, 80, 88–90, 99

    Van Dyke, his portrait of the Earl of Holland, ii. 63

    Vassall, Florentius, ii. _92_

    Vassall, Richard, father of Lady Webster, his illness, i. 19–20,
        69, 96;
      his death, i. 131

    Vega, Don Andres de la, ii. 245

    ‘Virtuous Triumvirate,’ the, i. 118

    Voltaire, and Piron, i. 202–3, 212–13;
      and Lord Bristol, i. 219;
      personated by M. Chauvet, i. 234;
      Condorcet’s Life of, ii. 15–16;
      his _Memoirs_, ii. 23;
      on the Collège de Montaigne, ii. 67–8


    Wakefield, Gilbert, and Bishop of Llandaff, i. 178–9;
      his trial and imprisonment, i. 241, 248, 258

    Walcheren Expedition, inquiry into, ii. 253

    Wales, George, Prince of, ii. 49, 266, 275–6;
      and Mr. Grey, i. 178;
      and Duke of Northumberland, i. 179–180;
      at Holland House, i. 190; ii. 82;
      and Sheridan, i. 221–2; ii. 283–4;
      and Mrs. Fitzherbert, i. 258;
      on Lord Holland’s succession to Mr. Fox, ii. 183, 186–7;
      on the Princess of Wales, ii. 197–9;
      and the Catholic Question, ii. 222;
      and Duke of York, ii. 268, 281–2;
      and Mr. Adam, ii. 273–4;
      and the Regency, ii. 278, 281–4;
      and Mr. Perceval, ii. 276, 280, 289, 290;
      and the Queen’s letter, ii. 289;
      and Dr. Vaughan, ii. 290

    Wales, Caroline, Princess of, ii. 199;
      charges against, ii. 192–3, 207;
      her defence, ii. 210

    Washington, George, ii. 52

    Webster, Sir Godfrey, his character, i. 6, 30;
      he returns to England, i. 132;
      his marriage annulled, i. 147;
      and Harriet Webster, i. 263, 264;
      his death, ii. 90–1;
      the guardianship of his children, ii. 104

    Webster, Harriet Frances, her birth, i. 126;
      restored to her father, i. 263–4;
      her fortune, ii. 98

    Webster, Lady, _see_ Holland, Elizabeth, Lady

    Webster, Godfrey Vassall (‘Webby’), i. 113, 143, 237; ii. 67, 98,
        104–5

    Wellesley, Sir Arthur (afterwards Duke of Wellington), ii. 246,
        254, 264

    Wellesley, Richard Colley, Marquess of, ii. 247–8, 249, 254

    Westmoreland, John, 11th Earl of, in Ireland, ii. 14–15;
      and George III., ii. 278

    Whig Club, the, i. 214, 227

    Whitbread, Samuel, and secession, ii. 38;
      on Lord Lauderdale’s negotiations, ii. 196–7;
      and Lord Howick, ii. 208, 211;
      at Southill, ii. 244;
      his unpopularity, ii. 285;
      and Lord Grenville, ii. 287–8

    Whitelocke, General, ii. 204

    Whitworth, Charles, Lord, and the Czar, ii. 73

    William V., of Holland, ii. 107

    Wilson, General Sir Robert, in Portugal, ii. 271–2

    Windham, William, refuses office, i. 118;
      refuses a peerage, ii. 184;
      and Lord Grenville, ii. 226;
      his death, ii. 255–6

    Wordsworth, William, ii. 231

    Wycombe, Lord (afterwards 2nd Marquess of Lansdowne), i. 137, 240,
        256, 266, 271–2; ii. 127;
      his character, i. 126–7;
      in Ireland, i. 191;
      his disputes with his father, i. 176, 209–10, 239; ii. 85;
      his journal quoted, ii. 142–5;
      his death, ii. 247

    Wyndham, Hon. William Frederick, i. 1;
      British Ambassador at Florence, i. 103;
      the appointment criticised, i. 104, 116;
      quarrel with Lady Holland, i. 133, 135

    Wyndham, Mrs., and Lady Holland, i. _96_, 127, 136;
      and Harriet Webster, i. 126;
      she quits her husband, i. 133


    Yarmouth, Francis, Earl of (afterwards 2nd Marquess of Hertford),
        i. 69, 80, 104;
      and peace negotiations, ii. 163–5, 167–9, 177, 179

    York, Frederick Augustus, Duke of, i. 89, 104;
      and siege of Valenciennes, i. 80, 87, 91;
      at Dunkirk, i. 93–5;
      in Holland, ii. 13, 23, _32_, 59;
      and Catholic Bill, ii. 224;
      and Prince of Wales, ii. 268, 281–2


         _Spottiswoode & Co. Ltd. Printers, New-street Square,
                                London_


    FOOTNOTES:

    [1] Sir George Lyttelton (1709–1773), created Baron Lyttelton in 1756.
He married, first, in 1742, Lucy, daughter of Hugh Fortescue, Esq.,
of Filleigh, co. Devon; and secondly, in 1749, Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir Robert Rich, Bart. His son, Thomas, born in 1744, succeeded his
father, but died without issue in 1779, when the peerage expired. It
was, however, re-created in 1794 in favour of a cousin, from whom the
present owner of Hagley, Viscount Cobham, is directly descended.

    [2] These trees were sent as a present to Queen Mary by a Dutch
merchant. The vessel in which they were placed was wrecked, and its
contents were claimed by the Lord of the Manor, the owner of Margam. He
afterwards offered to restore them, but was given them as a present by
the King.

    [3] Thomas Mansel Talbot married, in 1794, Lady Mary Lucy
Fox-Strangways, second daughter of Henry Thomas, second Earl of
Ilchester, and his first wife Mary Theresa, daughter of Standish
O’Grady, Esq. After Mr. Talbot’s death Lady Mary married, in 1815, Sir
Christopher Cole. She died in 1855. Margam belonged originally to the
Mansel family, and came to the Talbots by marriage. The female line of
the Mansels became extinct in 1750.

    [4] Lord Plymouth died the preceding June, and their son, Other Archer,
who succeeded as sixth Earl, was at this time a boy of ten.

    [5] Edward, fifth Earl of Oxford of that creation (1773–1848), who
succeeded his cousin in 1790. He married, in 1794, Jane Elizabeth,
daughter of Rev. James Scott, rector of Itchen, Hants. She died in
1824, at the age of fifty-one. Their eldest son, born in 1800, was
drowned in a shipwreck off Jersey in 1828, and the peerage became
extinct after their second son’s death. He succeeded his father in 1848.

    [6] Richard Payne Knight (1750–1824), son of Rev. Thomas Knight, Rector
of Bewdley, Worcestershire. He inherited Downton Castle from his
grandfather, Richard Knight, about 1764, but spent many years in Italy,
where he laid the foundations of his collection of coins, bronzes, and
marbles. These he left at his death to the British Museum. He sat in
the House of Commons from 1780 until 1806, and was looked upon as a
recognised authority on the customs and arts of ancient times.

    [7] Charles, eleventh Duke of Norfolk (1746–1815), who succeeded his
father in 1786. He married, first, in 1767, Marian, daughter of John
Coppinger, Esq. She died the following year, and, in 1771, he married
Frances, only child of Charles Fitzroy Scudamore, of Holme Lacy,
co. Hereford. On the Duke’s death in 1815 he was succeeded by his
cousin. When the Duchess died in 1820, her property devolved on the
heirs-at-law of her grandfather, the descendants of his sister Mary,
wife of Sir Giles Brydges. The Duke was a firm supporter of the Whigs,
and was dismissed by George III. from the Lord-Lieutenancy of Sussex in
1798, for an injudicious speech. See _ante_, i. 177.

    [8] Edward Bolton Clive, a connection of Lord Clive, and sometime M.P.
for Hereford. He was eldest son of George Clive and Sydney, daughter of
Thomas Bolton, Esq. He married, in 1790, Harriet, daughter of Andrew,
second Lord Archer.

    [9] Captain Charles Morris was born in 1745. He entered the cavalry
and exchanged into the Life Guards. He was an intimate associate of
the Whigs, and many of his songs were directed against their political
opponents. A constant guest at Carlton House, he was subsequently given
a pension by the Prince of Wales, and lived for many years near Dorking
previous to his death in 1838, in his ninety-third year.

    [10] After the departure of Macdonald and the French from Naples, the
town was seized by the Royalist bands and only two or three isolated
fortresses garrisoned by Frenchmen and Neapolitan rebels held out.
The sequence of subsequent affairs is most complicated. It appears a
capitulation under terms was arranged, but was disallowed by Nelson
until the sanction was obtained of the King, who was expected in the
course of a few days. The result was to hand over to the popular fury
many of those who had surrendered on the understanding that their lives
were safe.

    [11] A landing was effected near the Helder on August 27, and three
days later the Dutch fleet, consisting of twelve ships of the line,
obeyed Admiral Michell’s summons to surrender. The seamen were inclined
to the Royal cause and forced their officers to take this course. Until
the arrival of the Russians a fortnight later the English remained on
the defensive, then an advance was commenced which proved unsuccessful.
Various small engagements took place with varied result, but by the
middle of October it was found impossible for the allies to win their
way from the islands on which they were encamped. Retreat was therefore
necessary, and a capitulation was arranged.

    [12] Sherborne was granted in 1616 to Sir John Digby, first Earl of
Bristol, his father. It now belongs to Mr. Frederick Wingfield Digby.

    [13] Sir Richard Colt Hoare, second Baronet (1758–1838), only son of
Sir Richard Hoare, of Barn Elms, by his first wife, Anne, daughter of
Henry Hoare, Esq., of Stourhead. The first Baronet had also a large
family by his second wife, Frances Ann, daughter of Richard Acland, Esq.

    [14] John, eleventh Earl of Westmorland (1759–1841). He succeeded his
father in 1774, and married, against the wishes of her family, in 1782,
Sarah Ann, only daughter of Robert Child, Esq., of Osterley Park.
Her death took place in 1793, and Lord Westmorland married, in 1800,
Jane, daughter of R. H. Saunders, Esq., M.D. He was Lord-Lieutenant of
Ireland from 1790 to 1795, and Lord Privy Seal from 1798 until 1827,
with a short interval in 1806–7.

    [15] William Wingfield Baker, son of George Wingfield, of Cotham, co.
Durham, and Mary, niece of George Sparrow, Esq. He married Charlotte
Marie, daughter and sole heiress of Henry, first Earl Digby, in 1796.
She died in 1807, and Mr. Wingfield married, in 1813, Elizabeth,
daughter of William Miles, Esq., of Bisterne, Hants. He assumed the
name of Baker by royal licence in 1849, and died in 1858.

    [16] Lord Archibald’s father succeeded his nephew in August 1799, as
ninth Duke of Hamilton, and sixth Duke of Brandon.

    [17] Thomas Chaplin, of Riseholme, Lincolnshire, second son of Charles
Chaplin and Elizabeth Thornton. He married Elizabeth, Sir Godfrey
Webster’s sister, and was appointed guardian to the Webster children
after Sir Godfrey’s death.

    [18] He did not obtain this post, but was appointed Advocate-General in
Bengal, through Lord Lansdown’s influence, in 1803.

    [19] Sherborne.

    [20] A yellow and white spaniel.

    [21] Lord Henry Spencer.

    [22] Colonel the Hon. Thomas Onslow (1755–1827), eldest son of George
Lord Onslow, who was created Earl of Onslow in 1801. He sat in
Parliament for Rye from 1775 to 1784, and for Guildford from 1784 till
1806. He succeeded his father as second Earl in 1814.

    [23] Sir John Frederick, of Burwood Park, Surrey, fifth Baronet
(1749–1825); for some years M.P. for Surrey.

    [24] Lieut.-Colonel George Montagu (1751–1815), son of James Montagu,
of Lackham, Wilts, a connection of the Earls of Manchester. He served
in the American war, and commanded the Wiltshire Militia for many
years. He was an authority on natural history, and published an
_Ornithological History of British Birds_ in 1802. His collection
of birds was purchased by the British Museum.

    [25] Edward Adolphus, eleventh Duke of Somerset (1775–1855) eldest
son of Webb, tenth Duke of Somerset, and Anna Maria, daughter of John
Bonnel, Esq., of Stanton Harcourt, Oxford. He succeeded his father in
1793, and married, first, in 1800, Charlotte, daughter of Archibald,
ninth Duke of Hamilton. His wife died in 1827, after a long illness.
He married, secondly, in 1836, Margaret, daughter of Sir Michael Shaw
Stewart, Bart. The Duke of Somerset’s Devonshire residence was Berry
Pomeroy, near Totnes.

    [26] Lord Webb John Seymour, born in 1777, and died unmarried in 1819.
Lord Cockburn in his _Memorials_ says, ‘His special associate was
Playfair. They used to be called husband and wife, and in congeniality
and affection no union could be more complete. Geology was their
favourite pursuit.’

    [27] John Playfair (1748–1819), Professor of Mathematics, and later of
Natural Philosophy, in the Edinburgh University.

    [28] Jérôme Marie Champion de Cicé (1735–1810), appointed Archbishop of
Bordeaux in 1781. He sided with the popular party, and his appointment
to a post in the Ministry by Louis XVI., after Necker’s return, was
well received. He was accused, however, of favouring the reactionaries,
and resigned his office and Bishopric in 1790. He remained abroad until
the establishment of the Consulate.

    [29] Dugald Stewart (1753–1828), son of Matthew Stewart, Professor of
Mathematics at Edinburgh University. He assisted his father in his
later years with his mathematical classes, and in 1785 was appointed to
the chair of Moral Philosophy. His lectures were eagerly attended, and
many of the young men of the great Whig families were sent to Edinburgh
to benefit by them. He married, first, in 1783, Helen, daughter of Neil
Bannatyne, by whom he had one son. She died in 1787, and he married
in 1790, Helen, daughter of Hon. George Cranstoun--the ‘Ivy’ of the
letters, recently published, from John William Ward (afterwards Earl of
Dudley), who had been placed under her husband’s care. She died in 1838.

    [30] Sir Ralph Abercromby, his second-in-command.

    [31] Alexander (1767–1852), who succeeded his father, as tenth Duke of
Hamilton in 1819. The difficulty was solved by styling him Marquess of
Douglas and Clydesdale.

James, sixth Duke of Hamilton (1724–58), the husband of the beautiful
Elizabeth Gunning, left two sons and one daughter, Elizabeth, who
married Edward, twelfth Earl of Derby. The two sons succeeded
successively as seventh and eighth Dukes, and on the latter’s death
in 1799 the titles reverted to Lord Archibald Hamilton’s father--the
half-brother of the sixth Duke.

    [32] Copley.

    [33] Lord Holland’s uncle, the Hon. Henry Edward Fox (1755–1811),
youngest son of Henry, first Lord Holland, and Caroline, daughter of
Charles, second Duke of Richmond. He entered the army at the age of
fifteen, and served in America throughout the war. On his return in
1783 he was appointed aide-de-camp to George III., and especially
distinguished himself in command of an infantry brigade in Flanders
(1793–95). He was appointed Lieut.-General in 1799, and received
successively the appointments of General in the Mediterranean (1801),
Commander-in-Chief in Ireland (1803), Lieut.-Governor of Gibraltar
(1804). In 1806 he was given command of the forces in Sicily, and
appointed Ambassador to the Court of Naples, but was recalled on
the fall of the Ministry the following year and made Governor of
Portsmouth. He married, in 1786, Marianne, daughter of William Clayton,
Esq.

    [34] The treaties were originally drawn up with the object of
prevailing on the King of Prussia to join against the common foe. These
efforts, however, failed, and England and Russia decided that a joint
attack on the French in Holland was the most likely step to annoy.
A second treaty was therefore concluded to this effect. After the
ultimate failure of the expedition the Russians were quartered for the
winter in Jersey and Guernsey.

    [35] Evan Nepean (1751–1822), created a Baronet in 1802. He was
Secretary to the Admiralty from 1795 until 1804, when he became
Secretary of State for Ireland.

    [36] General Sir Charles Grey, K.B. (1729–1807), afterwards created
Earl Grey. He was at this time in command of the Southern district in
England.

    [37] Peter, seventh Lord King (1776–1833), eldest son of Peter, sixth
Lord King, and Charlotte, daughter of Edward Tredcroft, Esq., of
Horsham. He succeeded his father in 1793, and married, in 1804, Lady
Hester Fortescue, daughter of Hugh, first Earl Fortescue. His eldest
son was created Earl of Lovelace in 1838. He made his maiden speech in
the House of Lords on the above subject two months later, but seldom
took part in the debates. He became, however, a recognised authority on
questions of finance and currency.

    [38] Joseph Hager, born at Milan in 1757. A German by birth, he was
educated at Vienna, and after obtaining a thorough knowledge of
European languages turned his attention to those of the East. He wrote
several books on the Chinese tongue, by which he obtained celebrity,
and was appointed Professor of Oriental Languages at Pavia in 1809.
When this post was abolished, he became Keeper of the Milan Library. He
died in 1818.

    [39] At the opening of the session, on September 24.

    [40] In a series of engagements centring round Zurich Masséna forced
the Russian General Korsakoff to retreat to Constance, and inflicted
on him great loss. The _Annual Register_ puts the loss of the
Allies, arrived at ‘by a most ingenious and accurate computation,’ from
September 25 to October 9, at 15,000 men, and that of the French at
9000. Suvarroff, however, was not ‘totally defeated.’ On finding what
had occurred, he decided to move his army straight across Switzerland,
and after an adventurous march, complicated by continual fighting,
effected a junction with Korsakoff early in October. Suvarroff retired
to Russia shortly after this, and died in retirement.

    [41] The castle of Aboukir had been stormed and captured on July 15 by
the Turkish army under Mustapha Pasha. It fell again into the hands of
the French on August 2, after eight days’ fighting.

    [42] William Cusac Smith (1766–1836), eldest son of Sir Michael Smith,
Bart., who died in 1808. He was called to the Irish Bar in 1788, and
became a King’s Counsel seven years later. Though a follower of Burke,
he sided with the Government, and was a strong supporter of their
policy of the Union. He was appointed Solicitor-General in 1800, and a
Baron of the Exchequer the following year.

    [43] The position of the British and Russian troops in Holland had
become so unsatisfactory and precarious owing to the inclemency of the
weather and various other circumstances, that the Duke of York decided
early in October to withdraw his advance posts and report the whole
matter to the home Government. The enemy made one determined attack on
the British during their retirement, but were repulsed with loss. On
October 17 a truce was agreed to between the combatants, and it was
arranged as a set-off to permission to the British to re-embark without
molestation that 8000 of the Batavian and French seamen, prisoners in
England, should be given up to the French.

    [44] John Philpot Curran (1750–1817), the Irish lawyer and patriot. He
was on most occasions distinguished for his wit and the brilliancy of
his conversation.

    [45] George Ponsonby (1755–1817), third son of John Ponsonby, and
brother of William, first Lord Ponsonby. After many years in the Irish
Parliament, he took his seat at Westminster in 1801, as member for
Wicklow. He was appointed Lord Chancellor of Ireland in 1806, but
after the fall of the Ministry returned to the House of Commons. From
1808 until his death he was recognised as the official leader of the
Opposition in that House.

    [46] Bonaparte left Egypt on August 24 ‘in consequence of news from
Europe,’ as he stated in his general declaration to the Army. He landed
at Fréjus on October 7, and at once set off for Paris.

    [47] William Young was not Fielding’s tutor, but an intimate friend,
who collaborated with him in several of his works.

    [48] Etienne Charles Loménie de Brienne (1727–1794), who was appointed
to succeed Calonne as Finance Minister in 1787. Louis XVI. appointed
him Archbishop of Sens the following year, when he had proved himself
no greater success as Minister than his predecessor. He was replaced by
Necker.

    [49] James Scarlett (1769–1844), second son of Robert Scarlett, Esq.,
of Jamaica. He was called to the Bar in 1791, and became a King’s
Counsel in 1816. After an unsuccessful attempt in 1812 he entered
Parliament as a Whig in 1819, and was made Attorney-General by Canning
in 1827. He resigned this post the following year, but considering
himself ill-used by his party in 1830, joined the Tories, and was by
them appointed Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer in 1834. He retained
the post until the time of his death. He was created Lord Abinger
in 1835. He married, first, in 1792, Louisa Henrietta, daughter of
Peter Campbell, Esq., of Kilmory, co. Argyll; and secondly, in 1843,
Elizabeth, daughter of Lee Steere, Esq., and widow of Rev. Henry John
Ridley.

    [50] Harvey Christian Combe, Lord Mayor of London for year ending
November 9, 1800.

    [51] Probably William, second son of Hon. George Dalrymple, of
Dalmahoy, who became a general officer and Lieut.-Governor of Chelsea
Hospital. He died in 1807, and left a son who succeeded as seventh Earl
of Stair.

    [52] Sir Gilbert Affleck’s house, near Newmarket.

    [53] See _Annual Register_ for 1800, State Papers, p. 203.

    [54] _St. Leon_, a novel.

    [55] Duchess of Leinster.

    [56] William Gifford (1756–1826), a friend of Canning and editor of the
_Anti-Jacobin or Weekly Examiner_. He was subsequently editor of
the _Quarterly Review_ from its commencement in 1809 until 1824.

    [57] Charles Nevison, Viscount Andover (1775–1800), eldest son of
John, fifteenth Earl of Suffolk. He married, in 1796, Jane Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas William Coke, afterwards created Earl of Leicester.

    [58] Lords Morpeth, Granville Leveson-Gower, Boringdon, Duke of
Bedford.

    [59] Don Raymond della Massa.

    [60] Hon. Charles Kinnaird (1780–1826), eldest son of George, seventh
Baron Kinnaird. He succeeded his father in 1805, and married the
following year Lady Olivia Fitzgerald, youngest daughter of William
Robert, second Duke of Leinster. He sat in the House of Commons for
Leominster from 1802 to 1805.

[61] The subject of this correspondence was a remark of Lord Kenyon in
June 1799, when in dealing with a case, Host _v._ Whalley, he mentioned
that General Fitzpatrick had lost 400_l._ or 500_l._ in a gaming house,
which he refused to pay, and animadverted somewhat severely on his
conduct. General Fitzpatrick, in his first letter, dated August 27,
1799, denied that these were the true facts. He stated his reasons
for refusing to discharge his debt for the present to Mr. Martindale,
an undischarged bankrupt, and informed him that he had the latter’s
sanction to the course he was taking. He said he hoped, therefore,
that Lord Kenyon would take an early opportunity of correcting his
statement, but as he did not do so, he wrote again, on January 20, that
his only course was to publish his letters. These appeared in the _True
Briton_, March 5, 1800.

    [62] Sir Archibald Macdonald, Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

    [63] Sylvester Douglas (1743–1823), created Lord Glenbervie in 1800.

    [64] Jacques Etienne Macdonald (1765–1840), one of Napoleon’s generals;
made a Marshal, and created Duke of Tarento, after Wagram.

    [65] Benedetto Menzini (1646–1704), Italian poet and satirist.

    [66] Louis Léon de Brancas, Duc de Lauragais (1733–1824), French
_savant_ and writer.

    [67] The island was captured by the English in 1655.

    [68] The Royal Institution, founded in March 1799 by Count Rumford,
Sir Joseph Banks, and others. It was incorporated January 13, 1800, by
royal charter.

    [69] Horne Tooke opposed Fox and Sir Alan Gardner at Westminster in the
election of 1796, and was returned at the bottom of the poll. He was
ordained in 1760, at his father’s bidding, but did very little clerical
duty. After he obtained a seat in Parliament for Old Sarum in 1801, a
bill was brought in by Addington declaring the ineligibility of clergy.
This was passed, but Tooke was allowed to retain his seat until the end
of that Parliament.

    [70] Charles François de Riffardeau, Marquis de Rivière (1763–1828).
He left France with the Comte d’Artois, but returning was implicated
in the Cadoudal conspiracy in 1804, and was condemned to death. The
sentence was commuted by Napoleon to perpetual imprisonment, and it
was not until the Restoration that he regained his liberty. He was
Ambassador at Constantinople from 1816 to 1820.

    [71] Sir Benjamin Hobhouse (1757–1831), son of John Hobhouse, of
Bristol, and father of John Cam Hobhouse, created Lord Broughton. He
sat in Parliament from 1797 until 1818, and was made a Baronet in 1812.

    [72] The Duc de la Rochefoucauld was killed in 1792 by the
revolutionaries at Gisors. The Duc de Liancourt was his first cousin.

    [73] Claude Carloman de Rulhière (1735–1791), a French writer, was
aide-de-camp to the Maréchal de Richelieu for some years.

    [74] _His History of James II._, which was published, after his
death, in 1808, with a preface by Lord Holland. Lord Brougham, in his
_Statesmen of the time of George III._, says of his writings,
‘The practice of composition seems never to have been familiar to
Mr. Fox.... His _History_ shows the same want of expertness in
composition. The style is pure and correct, but cold and lifeless;
it is even somewhat abrupt and discontinuous, so little does it flow
naturally or with ease.’

    [75] Rev. Francis North (1772–1861), afterwards sixth Earl of Guilford.
He was eldest son of the Hon. Brownlow North and Henrietta Maria,
daughter of John Bannister. His father held successively the sees of
Lichfield (1771), Worcester (1774), and Winchester (1781), and died
in 1820. Mr. North married, in 1798, Esther, daughter of Rev. John
Harrison, who died childless in 1823. He married, secondly, in 1826,
Harriet, daughter of Lieut.-General Sir Henry Warde, G.C.B. On the
death of his cousin Frederick, fifth Earl of Guilford, in 1827, who
never married, he succeeded to the earldom.

    [76] John Courtenay (1741–1816), son of William Courtenay. He was
private secretary to Lord Townshend in Ireland, and was returned by him
in 1780 for Tamworth, for which place he sat until 1796. From that year
until 1807 he was member for Appleby.

    [77] The Royal Institution.

    [78] Joseph Stock (1740–1813), appointed Bishop of Killala in 1798,
and transferred to Waterford and Lismore in 1810. Lord Holland, in
his _Memoirs of the Whig Party_, states that this pamphlet was
supposed to have interfered with his chances of promotion.

    [79] Holland House.

    [80] Henry Rich (1590–1649), second son of Robert, Earl of Warwick,
and his wife Penelope Rich (the ‘Stella’ of Sir Philip Sidney). A
favourite with James I., he was, in 1623, created Baron Kensington,
having married Isabel, daughter and heiress of Sir Walter Cope, who had
built what was then called Cope Castle in 1607. There was probably a
house near, if not on the same site, but this was removed in order to
make way for Sir Walter’s mansion, erected from designs of John Thorpe.
Rich was raised to an earldom in 1624. Lady Holland has somewhat
exaggerated his intimacy with the Queen, but he certainly owed his
rapid advancement at Court greatly to her favour after James’ death.

    [81] Sir James Mackintosh, in a fragment of a _History of Holland
House_, preserved among the MSS., says that Van Dyke lived there for
about two years. He produces no authority, however, for this statement,
nor is the fact referred to in any recent biography of the great
painter.

    [82] This picture, as well as that of his brother, Robert, Earl of
Warwick, now belongs to the Hon. Mrs. Baillie Hamilton, a granddaughter
of the first Marquess of Breadalbane, at Langton, Duns. Lady Mary
Rich, daughter of Lord Holland, married, in 1657, Sir John Campbell,
of Glenorchy, who was created Earl of Breadalbane and Holland in 1681.
Lady Holland is, however, mistaken in her description of the picture.
Lord Warwick is in court dress, while Lord Holland wears the leather
doublet and steel breast-plate of the period.

    [83] These passages are not from Clarendon. They both are quoted in
Faulkner’s _History of Kensington_, published in 1820. The latter
of them is there said to be taken from a journal of the time, the
_Perfect Diurnal_.

    [84] Henry, Earl of Holland’s elder brother, Robert, became second Earl
of Warwick in 1618. On his death in 1658 the title passed in succession
to his sons Robert and Charles. The latter died in 1673, and leaving
no male issue the earldom passed to his cousin Robert, second Earl
of Holland, who had succeeded his father in 1649. He died two years
later, and both titles passed to his son Edward, who married Charlotte,
daughter of Sir Thomas Middleton (afterwards wife of Addison), while
his daughter married Francis Edwardes of Haverfordwest. Edward, Earl
of Holland and Warwick, died in 1701, and was succeeded by his only
son Edward Henry, above mentioned. On his death, unmarried, in 1721,
the properties passed to William Edwardes, his first cousin, who was
created Baron Kensington in 1776, while the earldoms reverted to a
distant cousin, at whose death the titles became extinct.

    [85] Horace Walpole, in a letter to George Montagu (May 16, 1759),
writes, ‘Unluckily, he died of brandy.’

    [86] ‘In 1749 it was let on lease, at a rent of 182_l._
16_s._ 9_d._, to Henry Fox, first Lord Holland, who bought it
in 1767’ (Princess Liechtenstein’s _Holland House_).

    [87] Lady Georgina Caroline Fox, created Baroness Holland in 1762, was
Charles, second Duke of Richmond’s eldest daughter. She died in 1774,
twenty-three days after her husband’s death.

    [88] Sister of Sir Lionel Copley and of Lord Abercorn’s first wife,
who died in 1791. Her second brother, Joseph, who succeeded to the
baronetcy on Sir Lionel’s death in 1806, ran away with and married Lord
Abercorn’s second wife.

    [89] Lady Ann’s brother, who succeeded his father in 1809 as third Earl
of Arran (1761–1837).

    [90] Lord Archibald Hamilton’s sister, and eldest daughter of
Archibald, ninth Duke of Hamilton. The marriage took place on June 24.
She died in 1827. Her youngest sister, Susan, married, in 1803, George,
fifth Earl of Dunmore.

    [91] Lord Auckland was Chief Secretary in Ireland under Lord Carlisle,
but was included in Lord Shelburne’s Government of 1783, and went out
of office with Pitt, to whom he attached himself.

    [92] The treaty of El Arish was concluded in January. By it the French
troops were to be allowed to return to France, without any stipulation
as to their non-employment in the future. This was directly contrary
to the instructions of the British Government, which only reached Sir
Sidney Smith after the conclusion of the peace. The Ministers, however,
on hearing that his word was pledged, assented to the Articles, but
meanwhile the French victory at Heliopolis over the Turks made them
disinclined to accept terms, and the fighting was renewed.

    [93] Charles, Lord Whitworth (1752–1825), Minister Extraordinary at St.
Petersburg from 1788 till 1800. He was raised to the peerage at Paul’s
own special request, but before the news of the honour arrived the Czar
had quarrelled with him and dismissed him from his dominions.

    [94] Paul’s views on the European question underwent a radical change
soon after Napoleon’s accession to the Consulate. He conceived a great
admiration for the conqueror of Italy, and this feeling was fostered by
the latter’s action in restoring him 7000 Russian soldiers, clothed in
new uniforms, whom the English had refused to include in a cartel of
exchange. Instead of the ally he suddenly became the active opponent of
England and Austria, seized all British ships in his ports, and ordered
Lord Whitworth to retire to Riga.

    [95] Grey in his speech disclaimed the fact that the object of his
motion was the reform of Parliament, though he owned he wished it was
so. As, however, this was impracticable he wished only to try to keep
Parliament in its present state.

    [96] John Gale Jones (1769–1838), a Radical politician of the advanced
school, though by profession a surgeon.

    [97] Fox, in a letter to Lord Holland, dated March 1798 (_Memorials
and Correspondence_), says: ‘With regard to secession (that is
_declared_ secession) I confess I do not like it as a measure,
but I believe the Duke of Bedford does. I should dislike to a degree
I cannot express to attend again myself: ... but I am so far from
wishing others to do the same, that I even wish for occasions when you
and others may have opportunity of attending.’ Again, on October 21,
he writes: ‘The Duke of Bedford, who is here, confirms what you say
of Grey’s intention to attend occasionally, and I shall not be at all
sorry to find myself the sole seceder.’

    [98] Lord Holland points out in the _Memoirs of the Whig Party_
that this was the first motion in the House of Lords on a subject which
finally received the assent of Parliament in 1829. The motion was not
directly negatived, but the debate was concluded by Lord Boringdon, who
moved the previous question.

    [99] A bill on this subject was brought in by Lord Auckland in April,
but was dropped after passing the second reading. The same gentleman
introduced a new Bill on May 16, which passed through the House of
Lords, though on third reading the figures were only 77 to 69. It was
also read twice in the House of Commons, but was thrown out on a motion
that it should be considered in Committee. The first was to prohibit
the intermarriage of the offending parties. The second contained an
additional clause making the offenders liable to imprisonment and fine.

    [100]

    From every latent foe,
    From the assassin’s blow,
      God save the King!
    O’er him thine arm extend,
    For Britain’s sake defend
    Our father, prince, and friend,
      God save the King!


    [101] Mr. William Fawkener, clerk to the Privy Council, and eldest son
of Sir Everard Fawkener, a London merchant.

    [102] Philip, fifth Earl of Chesterfield (1755–1815), son of Arthur
Stanhope, Esq., of Mansfield, Nottinghamshire, succeeded his relation
and godfather, the celebrated politician and wit, in 1773. His former
tutor, Dr. William Dodd (1729–1777), whom he appointed to the living
of Wing, forged his name in 1777 for a bond of 4200_l._ Dodd
was arrested, and notwithstanding great efforts made to save him, he
suffered the supreme penalty of the law.

    [103] Duke of Sussex. He had married Lady Augusta Murray secretly in
1793.

    [104] He was acquitted, upon the grounds of insanity, and was ordered
to be confined for the remainder of his life.

    [105] J. D. Carlyle (1759–1804), appointed Chancellor of Carlisle in
1793. He accompanied Lord Elgin’s mission to Constantinople as chaplain.

    [106] Masséna was forced to capitulate on June 4, but the delay had
given Bonaparte necessary time to cross the passes while Melas and his
Austrians were still busily engaged at Genoa. Part of the French army
of the Rhine was also liberated by Moreau’s successes over Knay, near
Ulm, and French reinforcements poured into Italy by the Simplon and St.
Gothard. Melas, probably unaware of the new arrivals, turned to defend
himself against Bonaparte, but was signally defeated on June 14 at
Marengo.

    [107] Count Semen Vorontzoff was appointed Russian Ambassador in
London, 1784, and remained there until 1806. He obtained permission
from his Government to continue to reside there after his official
connection with England had ceased, and died in 1832 at the age of
eighty-nine.

    [108] The Duke of Clarence used these quotations in a speech in
the House of Lords on the Divorce Bill. The sermon referred to was
delivered in 1795 by Samuel Horsley, Bishop of Rochester. The reason
for the Duke’s reference was to oppose the arguments which the Bishop
used on that occasion to his statements made on the Bill. Samuel
Horsley (1733–1806) was appointed Bishop of St. David’s in 1788, was
transferred to the see of Rochester in 1793, and to that of St. Asaph
in 1802.

    [109] Georgina Elizabeth, second daughter of George, fourth Viscount
Torrington, who married Lord John Russell (afterwards sixth Duke of
Bedford) in 1786, and died in 1801, leaving three sons, one of whom
was the celebrated statesman, Lord John Russell. Her husband succeeded
his brother in the dukedom in 1802. He was born in 1766, and married,
secondly, in 1803, Georgina, daughter of Alexander, fourth Duke of
Gordon. He held the post of Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1806–7, and
died in 1839.

    [110] Lady Georgina Dorothy Cavendish, eldest daughter of William,
fifth Duke of Devonshire, and Georgina, daughter of John, Earl Spencer.
She married Lord Morpeth in 1801, and died in 1858.

    [111] Sir William Scott (1745–1836), created Lord Stowell in 1821. He
practised in the Admiralty and Ecclesiastical Courts, and was appointed
Judge of the Consistory Court in 1788, Master of the Faculties in 1790,
and Judge of the High Court of Admiralty in 1798.

    [112] Grey married, in 1794, Mary Elizabeth, only daughter of William
Brabazon, first Baron Ponsonby, of Imokilly. She died in 1861. His
eldest sister, Elizabeth, married Samuel Whitbread in 1789. The latter
(1758–1815) was only son of Samuel Whitbread, of Southill, Beds. He was
elected as member for Bedford in 1790, and sat in Parliament until his
death by his own hand in 1815.

    [113] Magistrate at Bow Street. He retired on a pension the following
year.

    [114] Charles Abbot (1757–1829). He first entered Parliament in 1795,
and was made Speaker in 1802. He retired in 1816, and was then created
Baron Colchester.

The Bill was the result of a Committee appointed by Pitt in 1797,
with Abbot as chairman. It was designed to put an end to the habit,
prevalent in the preceding century, of persons in high office placing
the public moneys to their own account and appropriating to their
own use the interest which thus accrued. It was not even considered
necessary to refund the capital sum at the expiration of their term of
office, when the accounts were closed, and the matter was allowed to
drag on, as in the Hollands’ case, until it was found convenient to pay
off the whole.

The monies were outstanding from Lord Holland’s grandfather’s (Henry
Fox, first Lord Holland) Paymastership. The practice was looked on
as a right, though certain statesmen of the time--the Pitts and
others--refused to benefit by it, and thereby obtained the praise and
increased confidence of the public. The retrospective clauses were not
finally included in the Bill.

    [115] George O’Brien, third Earl of Egremont (1751–1837), the
well-known connoisseur and patron of the fine arts, who succeeded to
the title in 1763.

    [116] By her grandfather Florentius Vassall’s will the property was to
be equally divided among all her sons at her death.

    [117] John Lens (1756–1825), became a Serjeant-at-law in 1799, and
King’s Serjeant in 1806.

    [118] On him and his share in the quarrel between Lord Carlisle and
Lord Kenyon.

    [119] He was appointed Louis XV.’s doctor in 1731.

    [120] Joan, daughter and co-heiress of Major-General Scott, of
Balcomie, co. Fife. She was created Viscountess Canning in 1828, after
her husband’s death, and died in 1837.

    [121] John Millar (1735–1801). He accepted a professorship in law at
Glasgow in 1761. His lectures on civil law and jurisprudence were
renowned. He was strongly inclined to Whiggism, and favoured the
principles of the French Revolution, though detesting the excesses
which afterwards arose in that country.

    [122] Mr. Fox, writing of Lord Henry in 1802, says, ‘I never did see
a young man I liked half so much. Whatever disappointments Lansdown
may have had in public life, and of a still more sensible kind in Lord
Wycombe, he must be very unreasonable if he does not consider them all
compensated in Lord Henry.’

    [123] Mme. de Staël mentions Bonaparte’s visit to her father in her
_Considérations sur la Révolution française_, but does not allude
to having seen him herself. Bourrienne quotes Napoleon’s opinion of
her: ‘I do not like women who make men of themselves, any more than I
like effeminate men.... I cannot endure that woman: for one reason,
that I cannot bear women who make a set at me, and God knows how often
she has tried to cajole me!’

    [124] Charles, third Earl Stanhope (1753–1816), an outspoken admirer of
the doctrines of the French Revolution, and a social reformer of a most
advanced type.

    [125] Mrs. Warren Hastings, the divorced wife of Baron Imhoff. She
married Hastings in 1777.

    [126] Edward Law (1750–1818), created Lord Chief Justice and Baron
Ellenborough in 1802.

    [127] John, sixth Earl of Stair (1749–1821), only son of John, fifth
Earl of Stair, and Miss Middleton, daughter of George Middleton,
Esq. He succeeded his father in the earldom in 1789. He was Minister
Plenipotentiary in Poland, 1782, and to Berlin, 1785.

    [128] Sheridan’s second wife, whom he married in 1795--Esther Jane,
daughter of Newton Ogle, Dean of Winchester.

    [129] A note in the _Annual Register_ for 1800, dated May 7,
states that the Duke, having disposed of the materials of Bedford
House, ordered a sale of the contents. A list of the most valuable of
these is given.

Russell and Bloomsbury Squares, connected by Bedford Place, were
erected on the site of the house and gardens. The idea of a statue of
Lord Russell was not carried out, but in Russell Square a statue of the
Duke himself, by Sir Richard Westmacott, erected in 1809, now stands
facing Bedford Place. At the other end, in Bloomsbury Square, is a
bronze one of Charles James Fox by the same sculptor.

    [130] William V., the last Stadtholder, who left Holland in 1795 when
the Batavian Republic was declared, and died in 1806. His son was
restored as King in 1813.

    [131] Henry Webster, her son.

    [132] Sir Thomas Maitland (_d._ 1824) a brother of Lord
Lauderdale. He was in command of the troops in this expedition, with
local rank of major-general, while the naval force was under Sir
Edward Pellew. The peninsula of Quiberon was attacked and forts on it
captured, but nothing decisive was achieved.

    [133] John William, Viscount Duncannon (1781–1847), eldest son of
Frederick, third Earl of Bessborough, and Henrietta, daughter of John,
Earl Spencer. He succeeded to the titles on his father’s death in 1844.

    [134] Jean François Bourgoing (1748–1811), appointed Minister at
Copenhagen in 1799.

    [135] As soon as Napper Tandy took refuge at Hamburg in 1798, Lord
Grenville summoned the Senate to hand him over to the British
representative on the charge of high treason. After some delay he was
sent to England, and was tried early in 1800. He was acquitted on one
charge, but was condemned to death on a second. The sentence was never
carried out, and he was released in 1802. His surrender, however, cost
the Senate dear, for Bonaparte fined the city four and a half million
francs, for their action in handing over an individual who claimed to
be a French subject.

    [136] Perhaps the adventurer, James George Semple, alias Semple Lisle,
the son of an exciseman, who lived an adventurous life on the Continent
and in England, where he was several times sentenced to imprisonment
for fraudulent transactions. It is stated in the _Dictionary of
National Biography_ that the last thing known of him is in 1799,
when he was still in confinement in Tothill Fields prison.

    [137] Thomas Holcroft (1745–1809), the dramatist and novelist. His best
play, _The Road to Ruin_, was first performed at Covent Garden
in 1792. He was indicted of high treason in 1794, but was acquitted.
He left England in 1799, owing to want of money, but only stayed in
Hamburg a short time. He then went to Paris for two years, and died in
England.

    [138] Charles Maclean, writer on politics and on medical subjects. He
spent the best years of his life in India in the service of the East
India Company.

    [139] Henriette de Sercey, Mme. de Genlis’ niece (‘_A Circe_,’
according to Miss Burney), and companion on her visit to England in
1791, married M. Mathiessen at Hamburg in 1795 or 1796.

    [140] Lady Edward Fitzgerald.

    [141] Prince Adolphus Frederick, Duke of Cambridge (1774–1850), and
father of the late Duke of Cambridge. He was educated at Göttingen, and
served in the Hanoverian army until 1804.

    [142] Ahlden.

    [143] The heiress was Lady Elizabeth Percy, daughter of the eleventh
Earl of Northumberland. She was married at the age of eleven to the
Earl of Ogle, son of the Duke of Newcastle, who died the following
year. When fourteen her mother married her to Mr. Thynne, of Longleat,
in order to preserve her from Königsmark, who was trying to marry her.
As Thynne refused to fight a duel with a friend of Königsmark, who was
put up to pick a quarrel with him, his assassination, while driving
in Pall Mall, was arranged and duly carried out. In the ensuing trial
Königsmark was acquitted of complicity, but had to fly the country.

    [144] Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel. He was
born in 1735, and married, in 1764, Princess Augusta, sister of George
III. He was killed at the battle of Auerstadt in 1806. Their daughter,
Caroline, married George IV. The Duchess returned to England in 1807,
after the death of her husband, and died in 1813.

    [145] John Joshua, first Earl of Carysfort (1751–1828), only son of
Sir John Proby, first Baron Carysfort. He succeeded to the title on
his father’s death in 1772, and was raised to an earldom in 1789. He
married, first, in 1774, Elizabeth, daughter of the Right Hon. Sir
John Osborne; and, secondly, in 1787, Elizabeth, daughter of the Right
Hon. George Grenville. He held the post of Minister Plenipotentiary in
Berlin from 1800 until 1802.

    [146] Prince Ferdinand Augustus of Prussia (1730–1813), youngest
brother of Frederick the Great.

    [147] Frederick William III. married, in 1793, Louise, daughter of Duke
Charles of Mecklenburg-Strelitz. She was born in 1776, and died in
1810. Frederick William, who was son of Frederick William II. and his
second wife, Princess Louise of Hesse Darmstadt, became King of Prussia
in 1797.

    [148] Prince Henry of Prussia (1726–1802), another brother of Frederick
the Great.

    [149] Hugh Elliot, British Minister in Dresden until 1803, when he was
transferred to Naples.

    [150] Strict regulations were at this time in force against any
voluntary visit to places in the French dominions or under the rule
of the Republic. Lord Holland mentions in his _Memoirs of the Whig
Party_, that to obviate this he applied for a special permit, but
received no answer. As they had, however, passports from Bournonville
and La Valette, the French Ministers at Berlin and Dresden, and having
read a letter from Lord Grenville to Lord Carysfort saying that all
would be well if they did not visit Paris, they decided to go on. This
was fortunate, he says, for the Duke’s letter, which he did not receive
until his return to England, gave no decided permission, while as it
was they had no difficulty, on reaching Dover, in obtaining leave to
land.

    [151] Duchess Amalia of Saxe-Weimar, a Princess of Brunswick. She
married Ernest Augustus, Duke of Saxe-Weimar, who died in 1758, and
acted as guardian to her infant son, Charles Augustus, who lived until
1828.

    [152] James Henry Lawrence (1773–1840), miscellaneous writer, son of
Richard James Lawrence, Esq., of Jamaica. His essay on the customs of
native caste in Malabar was inserted by Wieland in his _Merkur_,
and he later published a romance on the same subject. In later life he
asserted that he was a Knight of Malta, and called himself Sir James
Lawrence.

    [153] Stephen, born January 18, 1799.

    [154] ‘The Parliament of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Ireland, otherwise called the Imperial Parliament, was opened, by
commission, on the 22nd of January, 1801.’... The King, however, did
not meet Parliament till the 2nd of February (_Annual Register_).

    [155] His medical attendant.

    [156] William, fourth Earl Fitzwilliam (1748–1833), Lord-Lieutenant of
Ireland in 1795.

    [157] The attempt to blow up Bonaparte on the way to the Opera
took place on December 24, 1800. The plot was hatched by three
Chouans--Limoëlan, Saint-Réjant, and Carbon. The two latter were taken
and executed; but the first-named escaped to America. An extract from
Lord Wycombe’s diary relating to the atrocity appears on p. 142.

    [158] Hon. William Stuart (1755–1822), fifth son of Lord Bute.
Appointed Bishop of St. David’s, 1793, and Archbishop of Armagh in 1800.

    [159] Hon. Mary Elizabeth Nugent, daughter of Robert, Viscount Clare
(afterwards Earl Nugent). She married, in 1775, George Grenville,
second son of the Right Hon. George Grenville. He succeeded his uncle
as second Earl Temple in 1779, and was created Marquess of Buckingham
in 1784. He was twice Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland, 1782–3, 1787–9: and
died in 1813. Lady Buckingham was created Baroness Nugent in 1800, with
remainder to her second son, George, at whose death in 1850 the title
became extinct.

    [160] Charles, afterwards second and last Marquess Cornwallis
(1774–1823).

    [161] John Fitzgibbon, appointed Lord Chancellor of Ireland in 1789,
and raised to an earldom in 1795, as Earl of Clare. He married, in
1786, Anne, daughter of Richard Whaley, Esq.

    [162] This of course was not the case. The King recovered sufficiently
to permit of the necessary arrangements being made.

    [163] Lord St. Vincent became First Lord of the Admiralty in
Addington’s Government, giving up the Channel Fleet.

    [164] Admiral the Hon. William Cornwallis (1744–1819), Marquess
Cornwallis’ brother, when proceeding as commander-in-chief to the West
Indies in 1796, put back owing to damage to his ship. He was ordered
to start again at once in a small frigate, but declined to do so on
the grounds of health. For this he was brought to a Court martial, but
though practically acquitted, he resigned his command.

    [165] Margaret Georgina, eldest daughter of the Right Hon. Stephen
Poyntz. She married John, first Earl Spencer, in 1755, and died in 1814.

    [166] This is not true. E.V.H., November 1801.

    [167] Grey’s wife was George Ponsonby’s niece. Ponsonby was the leader
of the Whigs in the House of Commons from 1808 till 1817.

    [168] Sir Walter Farquhar (1738–1819), the well-known doctor: physician
in ordinary to the Prince of Wales, and created a Baronet in 1796.

    [169] _Deaf and Dumb_, first acted on February 24. It was a free
translation of a play of Kotzebue.

    [170] See _ante_, ii. 74. The general impression in the minds of
Fox’s followers all through this vexed question of secession appears to
have been that those who did attend, and especially Tierney, were not
really anxious for Fox’s return to active political life, and preferred
to make the most of their own opportunities. Hence the somewhat biassed
feelings with which Lady Holland approaches the subject. Fox himself
was perfectly ready and willing that anyone should attend who wished
to do so, but there was an uneasy feeling which rankled in the hearts
of his friends, that interested and insidious motives underlay the
professions of goodwill towards him in certain quarters.

    [171] The letter is printed in the _Memorials and Correspondence of
C. J. Fox_, iii. 189. In it he states that he thinks he will go to
town no more that year. If he can be of service to the public or the
party he would do so, but he can see no chance of doing any good.

    [172] This was a second protest against the Bill. Lord Clare moved on
March 31 to have it expunged, and carried his point by ninety-two votes
to twenty. The first protest remains on the Journals. It was signed by
the same four Lords, and in addition by Lord Ponsonby.

    [173] The attempt to blow up Bonaparte on December 24 (3 Nivôse) 1800,
referred to previously, ii. 127.

    [174] The first performance in Paris of Haydn’s _Creation_.

    [175] Fouché.

    [176] Horne Tooke stood against Charles Fox for Westminster in 1790 and
in 1796, but was each time rejected by a large majority. Fox, however,
strongly opposed the Bill, aimed at Horne Tooke, forbidding clergymen
to sit in Parliament.

    [177] Lord Grenville refused to continue to support the Government,
because of the utterly inadequate terms on which he considered peace
had been obtained, and wrote to Addington, on October 14, informing him
of his reasons.

    [178] Lady Holland’s old friend Thomas Pelham, now Lord Pelham. His
father was created Earl of Chichester in June 1801.

    [179] Afterwards fourth Lord Holland. He was born on March 7, 1802.

    [180] Hugues Bernard Maret (1763–1839), created Duc de Bassano in
1809. Appointed Secretary of State, after the _coup d’état_ of 18
Brumaire, he succeeded Bourrienne as the Emperor’s secretary in 1804.
Minister for Foreign Affairs in 1811.

    [181] The horses, which were taken from Venice in 1797 and were
restored in 1815, stood on the triumphal arch in the Carrousel.

    [182] General Fitzpatrick.

    [183] Lord Robert Spencer.

    [184] Hon. Frederick Ponsonby (1785–1837), second son of Frederick,
third Earl of Bessborough. He became a Major-General and K.C.B., and
was Governor of Malta from 1826 till 1835. He married, in 1825, Emily,
daughter of the third Earl Bathurst.

    [185] John Bernard Trotter (1775–1818), who accompanied Fox to assist
him in transcribing certain material for his _History of the Reign of
James II._ He became his private secretary in 1806, and published
_Memoirs_ of the later years of his chief’s life in 1811,
including an account of this visit to Paris.

    [186] Washington George Louis, Marquis de la Fayette (1779–1849),
Washington’s godson, and a French deputy. La Fayette’s son-in-law, De
Lasteyrie, had finally to leave the army on account of the treatment he
received.

    [187] Antoine François, Count Andréossy (1761–1828), grandson of the
maker of the Languedoc Canal. He was appointed Ambassador to England
early in 1802, but left upon the recommencement of war. He was
successively Ambassador at Vienna (1809), and at Constantinople (1812).

    [188] Charles Ambroise de Caffarelli (1758–1826), born at Falga.
Originally a priest, he left the Church on the outbreak of the
Revolution, and after suffering imprisonment held several posts under
Napoleon. After the Restoration he again took up his ecclesiastical
duties. His brother, Louis, was a distinguished general, and had
already lost a leg when he joined the Egyptian expedition.

    [189] Cyrus-Marie de Timburne-Timbronne, Comte de Valence (1757–1822).
He served under Dumouriez, but did not desert the French cause for the
Austrian. He sent in his resignation, however, shortly after, and came
to England. He returned to France after 18 Brumaire, and commanded a
division in Spain and Russia. He married a daughter of Madame de Genlis.

    [190] Amédée-Bretagne-Malo de Durfort, Duc de Duras (1771–1838). He was
attached to the suite of Louis XVIII. when in exile, but returned to
France during the Consulate. He married Claire de Kersaint (1779–1828),
the well-known writer and friend of Chateaubriand.

    [191] Trophime Gérard, Comte de Lally-Tollendal (1751–1830), the
legitimate son of Lally, of Indian fame, and Félicité Crafton. At
the outbreak of the Revolution he sided with the Third Estate, but
disgusted with excesses he went over to the Court party and was obliged
to fly to England. He returned to France after 18 Brumaire, and was
made a peer by Louis XVIII.

    [192] Adélaïde Marie Filleul (1761–1836). She married the Comte de
Flahaut, who was more than three times her age, when eighteen. She went
abroad at the commencement of the Revolution, and after the Count’s
death on the scaffold, supported herself and her son by her pen. She
returned to France in 1798, and married, in 1802, the Portuguese
Minister in Paris, the Marquis de Souza-Botelho. Her novels are well
known, among the most celebrated being _Adèle de Sénanges_ and
_Emilie et Alphonse_.

Her son, Auguste Charles Joseph (1785–1870), served with distinction
in Napoleon’s wars, and resided outside France from 1815 to 1830.
Returning after the Revolution he held various high diplomatic posts,
and was Ambassador to England from 1860 to 1862. He married, in 1817,
Baroness Keith and Nairn, and one of his daughters married the fourth
Marquess of Lansdowne.

    [193] René Louis, Marquis de Girardin (1735–1808), who distinguished
himself in the Seven Years’ War, and afterwards settled at
Ermenonville. There he gave an asylum to Rousseau, who died in his
house. He was fortunate in saving his life in the Terror, and left
France to return after the troubles were over.

    [194] Jean Antoine Gallois (1761–1828), the friend of Cabanis. He
was made President of the Tribunate in 1802. He took but little part in
politics after 1814.

    [195] André Morellet (1727–1819), French writer. Made a Senator in
1808.

    [196] Louis Mathieu, Comte de Molé (1781–1855), who was imprisoned with
his father in 1794, but escaped death owing to his youth, and came to
England. He held various offices under Napoleon, and was continued in
his employment by Louis XVIII. He continued to take a leading part in
politics until 1851, and held several important posts.

    [197] Giuseppe Acerbi (1773–1846), an Italian naturalist. His book was
first published in English. He was Austrian Consul-General in Egypt,
1826–36.

    [198] Louis, Comte de Narbonne (1755–1813). He was son of one of
Princess Elizabeth’s ladies, possibly by Louis XV. At any rate he
was educated at the Court, and given a position in Madame Adélaïde’s
suite. He escorted the Princesses to Rome in 1791. After his return he
was made War Minister by Madame de Staël’s influence, but only held
the post three months. He fled abroad soon after, and did not return
till after 18 Brumaire. He offered his services to Napoleon, and was
variously employed by him until his death of typhus at Torgau.

    [199] Octave Gabriel, Comte de Ségur (1778–1818), son of Louis
Philippe, Comte de Ségur, and Antoinette d’Aguesseau. He married his
first cousin, daughter of Henri Cardin d’Aguesseau. He showed great
literary promise, but drowned himself in the Seine in 1818.

His brother, Philippe Paul (1780–1873), gained much distinction by his
military services, and became a recognised writer on military history.

    [200] Arnail François, Marquis de Jaucourt (1757–1852), born of a
Protestant family. He escaped death during the Terror and left France
in 1793. After his return in 1800 he became a Tribune and a Senator,
and later held several offices under Louis XVIII.

    [201] Giambattista Casti (1721–1803). Born at Montefiasconi, he entered
the Church, but gave up a canonry at his native town to travel. He is
best known by his poems, and became Poet Laureate of Austria after the
death of Metastasio.

    [202] Jean Baptiste Chevalier (1752–1836), secretary to the Ambassador
to Turkey, Comte de Choiseul-Gouffier, with whom he travelled in Asia
Minor in 1784–. He remained abroad during the Revolution, and on his
return was made keeper of the Sainte-Geneviève library.

    [203] Casimir, Comte de Montrond (1768–1843). He was incarcerated
during the Terror, and met in prison Mlle. de Coigny (Duchesse de
Fleury), the _Jeune Captive_ of André Chénier, whom he soon
afterwards married. After his divorce he became the bosom friend of
Talleyrand, and was one of the best known men in French society until
obliged to fly the country in 1812 on account of intrigues against
Napoleon.

    [204] Arcadi Ivanovitch Markoff, the favourite of Catherine II. He
was appointed Ambassador to Paris in 1801, but was recalled ere long
at the instance of Napoleon, who feared his diplomatic skill and
_finesse_. He held several other diplomatic posts, and died at a
great age.

    [205] Perhaps Pierre Marie, Marquis de Grave (1755–1823), successor to
Narbonne as War Minister. He only held the post a few months, as he
was obliged to leave the country on account of his devotion to Louis.
Trotter says Madame Roland describes him in one of her works as ‘a
good-natured little man, unfit for an ordinary situation--rolling his
blue eyes and falling asleep over his coffee.’

    [206] Edouard Dillon, son of Robert Dillon, and his second wife, Miss
Dicconson; one of a family of thirteen.

    [207] Joseph François Talma (1763–1826), the friend of David. He was
educated as a dentist, and first went on the stage in 1787. He quite
overcame a certain thickness of speech and stiffness of manner, and was
later justly celebrated for the purity of his accent.

    [208] Roch Amboise Sicard (1742–1822), the head of the Deaf and Dumb
Asylum in Paris initiated by the Abbé de l’Épée. The objective of this
institution, which still exists, has been to educate the inmates so as
to fit them to go out into the world and earn their own living.

    [209] Possibly Antoine Henri Bertrand the sculptor. He worked for some
years in Italy with Canova.

    [210] Charles de Noailles, afterwards Duc de Mouchy (1771–1834), eldest
son of Philippe de Noailles, Prince de Poix. He left France in 1792 and
came to England, where he remained till the Consulate. On his return he
continued his career in the army, and became Field-Marshal in 1815. He
was the bearer of the message from the Provisional Government in 1814
asking Louis XVIII. to return to France.

    [211] With the battle of Austerlitz, late in 1805, ended all hope of a
successful European coalition against Napoleon. The wavering counsels
of the Prussian Cabinet were decided once and for all by the action
of their envoy, Haugwitz, who concluded a treaty with Napoleon upon
receipt of news of the battle. The Austrians had to take the best
terms they could obtain, and by the Treaty of Presburg, in December,
retired from the struggle bereft of their fairest provinces. Napoleon,
who had given the kingdom of Naples to his brother, Joseph, now turned
to make peace with England. He found Fox, the new Foreign Minister,
less pliant than he had hoped. The restitution of Hanover, which had
been handed over to Prussia a few months before, was insisted upon, as
well as the maintenance in Sicily of Ferdinand. To the former demand
Napoleon agreed, and seemed inclined to accede to the latter request,
until he found that the Russian envoy, d’Oubril, was prepared to throw
over England, and sign a separate treaty. He then changed his tone and
demanded the cession of Sicily to Joseph; but by so doing lost the
opportunity for peace with both countries, for the Czar repudiated
the preliminaries signed by d’Oubril, and Fox recalled his envoy from
Paris. The failure of these negotiations put an end for the moment to
Napoleon’s designs on Portugal. A large portion of the French army
never actually reached Bayonne, but was elsewhere employed against the
Prussians. Lord St. Vincent remained with his fleet at Lisbon until it
was evident that the danger of an invasion of Portugal was past; and a
large force of troops, under Lord Rosslyn, who had been assembled at
Plymouth to await eventualities, was at the same time disbanded.

    [212] Three months (_Annual Register_ for 1806, Chapter ix.).

    [213] Francis Charles, Earl of Yarmouth (1777–1842), eldest son of
Francis, second Marquess of Hertford, whom he succeeded in the titles
in 1822. He married, in 1798, Maria Fagniani. He had been one of those
English who were detained in France after the rupture of the peace
of Amiens. He was released early in June owing to Fox’s personal
intervention, and was a bearer of a verbal message from Talleyrand
to him on the subject of peace. As it was necessary to keep these
communications secret, and as Lord Yarmouth’s return to his family
in France would not in any way excite attention, Fox sent him back
to Paris with orders to conduct the subsequent negotiations with the
French Government.

    [214] Talleyrand first offered the Hanse Towns.

    [215] Adam Georges Czartoriski (1770–1861). He was first brought to
Petersburg as a hostage, but gained the Emperor’s friendship, and was
made Foreign Minister at his accession. The views he held were liberal
and enlightened, and every influence he possessed over his master was
for the best. Despairing, however, of carrying out his schemes he
resigned in 1807, but still retained the Emperor’s ear.

    [216] James, second Earl of Rosslyn (1762–1837), nephew of the Lord
Chancellor, whom he succeeded in 1805. He had already served in
Portugal, 1796–9, as second-in-command to Sir Charles Stuart.

    [217] The Russian Ambassador in England.

    [218] Lord Holland in the _Memoirs of the Whig Party_ maintained
his entire disbelief in these rumours.

    [219] Henri Jacques Guillaume Clarke (1765–1818), afterwards created
Duc de Feltre. He was War Minister 1807–13, and held the same post
under Louis XVIII. in 1815. It was said of him, ‘C’est l’homme d’épée
qui doit le plus à sa plume.’

    [220] The town of Gaeta was besieged by the French under Masséna, and
capitulated before the Neapolitan and English forces, fresh from their
victory at Maida, were able to intervene. By this capture, Masséna’s
army of 18,000 was freed to make common cause with Regnier against the
Calabrians, and as all hope of success in that quarter was thereby
removed, Sir John Stuart withdrew his troops to Sicily.

    [221] Manuel de Godoy (1767–1851), Prime Minister of Spain. He obtained
this title from having concluded the peace with France in 1795.

    [222] Spanish Ambassador in Paris.

    [223] Lord Howick was First Lord of the Admiralty, and Lord Henry Petty
Chancellor of the Exchequer.

    [224] Ali Pacha, vizier of Janina (1744–1822), son of an Albanian
chief. He made his name by cruelty and brigandage, and was appointed
Governor of Trikala by the Turks for his assistance against Russia. He
allied himself to Napoleon in 1797, and again in 1807, but went over
to the English after the treaty of Tilsit. He made himself practically
independent of the Turks, who decided to rid themselves of him, and
having taken him prisoner, treacherously put him to death.

    [225] Two important points were at issue between England and the United
States, and popular excitement had risen to such a pitch in the latter
country that a non-importation order had been issued against British
goods, to take effect on November 15. The first ground of complaint was
the right claimed by England of searching and taking deserters out of
American ships; the second, the practice of seizing ships engaged in
the carrying trade between France and her colonies, although they had
touched at a neutral port.

    [226] James Monroe (1758–1831) who took a leading part in the war of
Secession and sat in the United States Senate from 1790 to 1794. He was
then sent as Ambassador to Paris, but was recalled two years later. He
was again sent there in 1802, and was employed for some years in London
and Madrid. He returned to America after the refusal of Jefferson
to ratify this treaty. He was appointed Secretary of State in 1811,
and was elected President in 1816, a post which he retained until he
retired from public life in 1825. He was the author of the message
to Congress in 1823, embodying the principles known as the ‘Monroe
doctrine.’

    [227] William Pinkney (1764–1822), an Englishman by birth, who gained
distinction in the legal profession. He was first sent to London in
1796 by Washington and added diplomacy to his other employments. Going
back to America in 1804 he returned to England two years later, and
remained as Minister till 1811. He was Attorney-General of the United
States for three years, and was Minister to Russia for a short time.

    [228] The latter was taken ill on the journey, returned immediately to
England, and died a few days after his arrival.

    [229] The correspondence relating to these negotiations is given in the
_Annual Register_ for 1806.

    [230] ‘His tenacity about the _uti possidetis_, and his frequent
recurrence to that phrase, led Napoleon to reproach him with an
adherence to “des formules Latines,” which to those well acquainted
with the nature of Lauderdale’s acquirements in classical phraseology
was diverting enough.’ (_Memoirs of the Whig Party_).

    [231] Comte de Montrond. See _ante_, ii. 159.

    [232] Baron André Jakovlevitch Budberg (1750–1812).

    [233] Ambassador to Russia, 1804–06, and again in 1807.

    [234] Jerome Bonaparte’s ship, the _Veteran_, was one of Admiral
Villaumez’s fleet, now France’s sole hope on the high seas. Originally
detailed for the Cape of Good Hope, Villaumez had crossed over to the
West Indies on hearing of the capture of the African settlement by the
English. He was unable to elude the vigilance of Sir Thomas Cochrane,
and three squadrons under the command respectively of Sir John Borlase
Warren, Sir Richard Strachan, and Admiral Louis were despatched to
confront him. Villaumez seeing that his fleet could not hope to escape
_en masse_, gave the order for his ships to separate. Only one
however, was successful in regaining France safely, and Jerome was only
able to save his crew and guns by running his ship ashore on the coast
of France. Sir John Warren’s fleet was despatched with exemplary haste,
but lost several days at Spithead owing to contrary winds. To this
delay Mr. Allen, in the _Annual Register_ for 1806, attributes the
escape of Villaumez’s squadron.

Sir John Borlase Warren (1753–1822), son of John Borlase Warren, of
Stapleford, Nottinghamshire. He entered the Navy in 1771, and saw much
service. He became Rear Admiral in 1799, and was sent to Russia in 1802
to compliment Alexander on his accession.

    [235] Mr. Fox had been lent Chiswick House by the Duke of Devonshire,
and was moved there at the end of July.

    [236] Near Malmesbury, in Wilts.

    [237] The funeral was fixed for October 10, by a curious coincidence
the anniversary of his first election for Westminster.

    [238] The new appointments were, Lord Howick, Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs; Mr. T. Grenville, Admiralty, in place of Lord
Howick; Mr. Tierney, President of Board of Control, in succession to
Mr. Grenville; Lord Sidmouth, President of the Council, in place of
Lord Fitzwilliam; and Lord Holland, Lord Privy Seal, in place of Lord
Sidmouth.

    [239] Lord Holland states fully his reasons for accepting office in
a letter to Lord Lauderdale, dated September 22. It is published in
_Memoirs of the Whig Party_, ii. 53.

    [240] Early in March Murat was given the Duchy of Berg and Cleves,
ceded to Napoleon by Bavaria, and other territories claimed by Prussia
were occupied by French troops a month later--this without any
communication to the Prussian Cabinet.

These and other arbitrary actions, following closely on the formation
of the Confederation of the Rhine, opened the eyes of the Prussians
to the true policy of the French Emperor, but the final blow to their
_amour propre_ was the discovery of their Ambassador in France,
Lucchesini, that Napoleon had cheated them over Hanover, by his
willingness to restore it to England, and that he threw no obstacles in
the way of the immediate re-establishment of the Kingdom of Poland.

    [241] Prince Louis Ferdinand, nephew of Frederick the Great, was born
in 1772. He served with distinction against Napoleon and was killed at
Saalfeld in 1806 in command of the advance guard.

    [242] ‘They want ordnance, and yet would begin by spiking one of their
great guns.’ Lord Holland relates this as another remark of Windham’s
upon the proposal.

    [243] Sir Home Popham’s expedition to South America, where he effected
the capture of Buenos Ayres on June 28. He had been originally
despatched to the Cape of Good Hope, where he met with complete success
and annexed that colony to the British Empire. Fired with this triumph
he made his way to the Rio Plate, without any instructions from
Government, who on hearing of his destination took steps to stop him,
but their orders arrived too late. Buenos Ayres remained in his hands
until August 4, when it was retaken by the Spaniards, with severe loss
to the British.

    [244] Lord Morpeth was sent to Berlin to offer the assistance of
England conditionally upon the immediate restoration of Hanover. He
arrived at headquarters two days before the battle of Jena, and found
Haugwitz, with whom he was to negotiate, unwilling to meet him in
any way. The intriguing Prussian still hoped to retain Hanover, and
expected after the battle to be able to say so. The result, however,
was contrary to his expectations, and as no diplomatic negotiations
were possible in the confusion after the battle Lord Morpeth returned
to London.

    [245] Bartholomew Frere (1778–1851), a younger brother of John Hockham
Frere, and son of John Frere, M.P. for Norwich. He was Secretary of
Legation to his brother in Spain and held various minor diplomatic
posts.

    [246] M. Jacobi, the Prussian Minister, had left England when
diplomatic relations between the two countries were broken off in the
spring. He passed Lord Morpeth on the sea, and reached England early in
October.

    [247] In the interval which elapsed since Lady Holland’s last entry
in her journal the whole position of Europe had again changed. The
Prussian army, decimated in one day at Jena and Auerstadt, had
practically ceased to exist; Frederick William was a fugitive at the
eastern end of his dominions in Königsberg. Napoleon had occupied
Berlin, and in two months had become master of many of the Prussian
fortresses, which it should have taken him years to reduce. Lucchesini
in the course of his negotiations for peace in Berlin was even ready to
give up those strongholds which had not surrendered, but the patriotic
party were too strong to allow the King to consent to further ignominy.
Russia was prepared to give her assistance, and this nerved Frederick
William to continue the war. Haugwitz resigned, but the King rendered
this lucky event ineffective by also dismissing Count Stein, the only
really able man in his councils.

    [248] War was formally declared between Russia and the Porte towards
the end of December.

    [249] Gustavus IV. succeeded, at the age of fourteen, to the crown of
Sweden after his father’s assassination in 1792. His hatred of Napoleon
and inclination towards an English alliance were the leading features
of his reign--features to which he so obstinately adhered as to cause
his country much unrest and suffering, and his own downfall. He was
deposed in 1809 in favour of his uncle.

    [250] The dissolution took place in October, and the new Parliament met
on December 15. Tierney was defeated at Southwark by Sir Thomas Turton.
He obtained a seat, however, at Athlone.

    [251] Sir Samuel Auchmuty (1756–1822), born in New York, of Scotch
descent. He served the crown in America as a volunteer, obtaining
a commission. He went to India, where he saw much service. He took
Monte Video, and showed considerable skill on this expedition
until superseded by General Whitelocke, who arrived with further
reinforcements. He later returned to India, and was also employed in
the East Indian islands.

Sir Home Popham, who was court-martialled in March, and reprimanded for
his share in the unauthorised expedition to Buenos Ayres, remained with
his fleet off the Rio Plate after the loss of the town. The Government
were much disconcerted by the whole affair, but the enthusiasm of the
public forced them to send reinforcements instead of orders of recall.
Three thousand men were despatched with Sir Samuel.

    [252] General Robert Craufurd (1764–1812). He served under Lord
Cornwallis in India, and was Quartermaster-General in Ireland during
the insurrection of 1798. His force was joined to General Whitelocke’s.
He commanded a light brigade in the Peninsula and was killed at the
storming of Ciudad Rodrigo. This expedition was intended for the
conquest of Chili, but was diverted to Buenos Ayres.

    [253] Aaron Burr’s (1756–1836) conspiracy was a sequel to his defeat
for the Presidency of the United States by Jefferson in 1801. This was
mainly brought about by General Hamilton’s influence, which was again
brought to bear against him in 1804 when he stood for the Governorship
of New York. A duel took place in which General Hamilton was shot
dead. Burr after this went to the West and established himself on the
Mississippi. He gained over General Wilkinson, the commander of the
United States army at New Orleans, to assist him in his schemes, though
nobody appeared to know their exact trend. Jefferson, however, grew
alarmed, Wilkinson recanted, Burr was arrested, and the whole plot
fell to the ground. Burr was acquitted of actual treason, and went to
Europe. There he remained, first in one country, then in another, till
1812, when he returned to America. He took no further active part in
politics, and died in extreme poverty.

    [254] Lord Mulgrave was Secretary for Foreign Affairs, 1805–6.

    [255] Preparations for this expedition ceased with the fall of the
Ministry. Their successors again took the project into consideration,
but the troops destined to take part in it under Sir Arthur Wellesley
were sent instead to Portugal.

    [256] Charles, third Duke of Richmond; born in 1735, died on December
29, 1806. He was succeeded by his nephew, Colonel Lennox.

    [257] The charges of immorality raised against the Princess of Wales by
Sir John and Lady Douglas were laid before a Committee of the Cabinet
in 1806 for investigation. It was composed of four members, the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice (Lord Ellenborough), and Lords
Grenville and Spencer, with Sir Samuel Romilly, the Solicitor-General,
as legal adviser. Their report acquitted her of the more serious
charges, but animadverted with severity on the levity of her conduct.
The Princess replied with a letter to the King ‘the joint composition
of Lord Eldon, Mr. Perceval, and Mr. Plomer; the first furnishing the
law, the second the argument, and the third the prolixity. It concluded
with a request to be restored to the comfort and honour of his
Majesty’s royal presence’ (_Memoirs of the Whig Party_, ii. 151).
This the King referred to the Cabinet, and after many deliberations,
with the exception of Mr. Windham, they concurred in the report.

It is curious that Lord Eldon, who it is here suggested was the secret
adviser of George III., was also the confidential adviser of George IV.
at the time of the trial in 1820.

    [258] This incident is fully described in _Coke of Norfolk_, ii.
69–73. Mrs. Berney and her friend were in the habit of parading the
town every day in a carriage decked in Colonel Wodehouse’s (the Tory
candidate) colours. One day, however, the Whigs produced a carriage
arranged to closely resemble theirs in every particular, but flaunting
the rival hue. A riot ensued, for which the Berney family held Coke and
Windham responsible, though they had in no way countenanced the trick.
All three candidates were convicted of treating, but as no petition was
brought against Colonel Wodehouse, he retained the seat. Mr. Coke’s
brother, Edward Coke, resigned his seat for Derby, for which the former
was elected; while the latter took the vacant seat at Norwich. Mr.
Windham was returned for Higham Ferrers by Lord Fitzwilliam.

    [259] ‘A clear and precise rule was laid down for the regulation of
the circuitous trade by the enemy to the colonies, which defined the
difference between a continuous and intercepted voyage’ (Alison,
_History of Europe_, v. 677). The discussion of the question
of impressment of seamen was postponed till some future occasion,
owing to the difficulties which surrounded it. The British Government
pledged themselves in the meantime to use their powers with the utmost
moderation. President Jefferson, however, refused to ratify the treaty.

    [260] At the rupture of the Treaty of Amiens.

    [261] Lord Minto had been appointed Governor-General of India. He at
first refused to accept office, and only did so at the earnest desire
of Lord Grenville. That he was loath to do so is shown by letters,
published in vol. iii. of his _Life and Letters_, to Lady Minto,
who on the score of health was precluded from accompanying him. Fox
first offered the appointment to Lord Lauderdale, but the Court of
Directors refused to receive him. He therefore consented to waive his
claim to the dignity.

    [262] In answer to Lord Howick Mr. Perceval explained that the word
‘attached’ was taken from a letter of Mr. Fox to Talleyrand published
in the Correspondence, in which he had ‘subscribed himself “with the
most perfect attachment”’ (_Hansard_).

    [263] William Roscoe (1753–1831), the author of the _Lives_ of
_Lorenzo de’ Medici_ and _Leo X._ He was elected in the Whig
interest as member for Liverpool in 1806, but was defeated at the
succeeding election.

    [264] William Frederick, second Duke of Gloucester (1776–1834), son of
William Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Maria, Countess of Waldegrave.
He married, in 1816, Princess Mary, George III.’s daughter.

    [265] Adolphus Frederick, Duke of Cambridge (1774–1850), seventh son of
George III.

    [266] This is probably the paper printed in _Memorials and
Correspondence of C. J. Fox_, ii. 340, &c. It was to be delivered
to the King in 1789, with the memorial, also drawn up by Minto and
Burke, containing a justification of the Prince’s and Duke of York’s
conduct during their father’s illness. Both documents were discussed at
a meeting of the Whig leaders held at Carlton House, and it was decided
not to present the memorial with this paper, but to accompany it only
with a short explanatory letter.

    [267] Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland.

When the Grenville Ministry first took office on Mr. Pitt’s death no
stipulation was made to the King regarding the Catholic question. The
Irish Catholics, seeing Ministers in power most of whom they knew to
be favourably inclined to their claims, began at once to agitate for
the removal of disadvantages under which they laboured. The greatest
anomaly was, that by the Act of 1793 Irish Catholics could become
officers in the army there (though still unable to rise to certain
staff appointments), but could not hold that rank in England. A
promise, however, had been made at the time that matters would be
speedily readjusted. This and other points were brought to Mr. Fox’s
notice soon after he had taken office, but he advised a postponement
of the suggested petition to Parliament, as likely for the present to
be of no permanent advantage. He stated, however, that he was quite
willing to risk a dissolution of the Ministry on the question, if they
so wished it. Better counsels prevailed; but after Mr. Fox’s death
the matter again came to the front. Ministers were in a dilemma. On
one side they risked the King’s displeasure, on the other they would
be obliged to proclaim certain parts of Ireland where agitation was
breaking out, on a question with which they themselves sympathised. The
former evil was considered the least, and it was decided by a clause
in the Mutiny Act to allow Irish Catholics and Dissenters to serve in
the English army. To this the King was agreeable; but Ministers desired
to go further. It was found easier to bring forward the matter in the
form of a Bill, and one was drafted which opened the staff appointments
to the Catholics, and also allowed English Dissenters to serve in the
army and navy. Lord Howick thought he had received the King’s consent
to this, but subsequently the latter flatly refused to confirm it. The
Bill was dropped, but the Ministers reserved for themselves the right
to bring forward the question again, should circumstances so demand.
This the King requested them to withdraw; they refused, and were at
once dismissed.

The Correspondence and Minutes of the Cabinet, referred to here and
subsequently, are printed in the Appendix to Lord Holland’s _Memoirs
of the Whig Party_.

    [268] Lieut.-General Whitelocke (1757–1833). He distinguished himself
in St. Domingo in 1793–4, but failed signally before Buenos Ayres. In
his attack on the town he showed himself incompetent to deal with an
unexpectedly determined resistance, and agreed to a convention whereby
the English troops were obliged to withdraw. On his return to England
he was tried by court martial and cashiered. Lord Holland states in
the _Memoirs of the Whig Party_ that this appointment was due
to Windham’s dislike of General Whitelocke (who held the post of
Inspector-General) and his desire to appoint someone as his successor
who would be more willing to carry out his schemes.

    [269] Elizabeth, Countess of Sutherland in her own right, Lord
Granville Leveson-Gower’s sister-in-law, only daughter of William,
eighteenth Earl of Sutherland. She was born in 1765, and married, in
1785, George Granville, Earl Gower, who succeeded his father as second
Marquess of Stafford in 1803, and was raised to a Dukedom in 1833. The
Duchess died in 1839.

    [270] This was in accordance with the resolution which Mr. Rose says
in his Diary he had taken never to say a word or give a vote on the
subject. He disapproved not of the abolition of the Slave Trade itself,
but of the methods pursued in putting it down, which he considered were
unfair to the colonists.

    [271] Arthur James, eighth Earl of Fingall (1759–1836), who succeeded
his father in the titles in 1793. He was one of the leaders of the
Catholic movement at this time.

    [272] John, second Baron Ponsonby, of Imokilly (1770?–1855), son of
William Brabazon Ponsonby, first Baron Ponsonby, who died in 1806. He
was Ambassador in Constantinople and Vienna and was created a viscount
in 1839. His only sister married Lord Howick.

    [273] William Elliot, of Wells, the Chief Secretary. He died in 1818.

    [274] William Conyngham Plunket (1764–1854), created Baron Plunket in
1827. He was appointed Attorney-General for Ireland in 1805 by Pitt,
and retained this office under the Whig Government.

    [275] Mr. Charles Kendal Bushe.

    [276] See _ante_, ii. 174. Mr. Eden was Secretary to the American
Commission and Mr. Allen Assistant-Secretary.

    [277] A Committee was appointed on February 10, on the motion of
Mr. Biddulph, member for Denbigh Borough, to examine the efficiency
of regulations and checks, already introduced, to control public
expenditure; to consider what further steps were advisable for the same
object, and to diminish ‘the amount of salaries and emoluments without
detriment to the public service.’

    [278] William Garrow (1760–1840), barrister, who sat in several
Parliaments in the Whig interest. He was knighted in 1812; made
Attorney-General in 1813, and Baron of the Exchequer 1817–32.

    [279] This was the pamphlet drawn up by Perceval, and known as ‘the
Book.’ It was never given to the world, for just as the Princess’s
friends resolved upon its circulation, the Ministry was dismissed and
the Tories returned to power. A few copies escaped from the printers’
hands, and were bought back for large sums by the Government.

    [280] Owing to the infraction of treaty obligations in Moldavia and
Wallachia by Turkey, largely instigated by Sebastiani the French
Ambassador at Constantinople, Russia thought fit to declare war with
the Porte late in 1806. Alexander, however, had need of all his forces
to meet the French in Central Europe, and he suggested to the English
Government that a fleet should be sent to Constantinople to secure
their joint interests, and to demand the dismissal of Sebastiani. This
was done, and Arbuthnot, the British Minister, was ordered to insist
on the latter point, on the pain of instant bombardment. Unfortunately
Arbuthnot had to leave owing to ill health, and Sir Thomas Duckworth,
the British Admiral, allowed himself to be drawn into fruitless
negotiations, and finally withdrew without accomplishing his object.

The force sent to Egypt under General Mackenzie captured Alexandria,
but lost a large number of prisoners in an attack on Rosetta. Nothing
further was effected, and the troops were removed in the autumn.

    [281] John Armstrong (1758–1843), American Minister in France and Spain
1804–10.

    [282] The Right Hon. Charles Long (1761–1838), afterwards created Lord
Farnborough (1820), Secretary of State for Ireland 1806, and Paymaster
of the Forces for many years.

    [283] George Rose (1744–1818), a devoted adherent of Pitt. He was for
many years Secretary of the Treasury, and held various minor offices
under the Tories.

    [284] This is amusing and interesting, in light of Lord Malmesbury’s
conversation with Canning, which he quotes in his diary as having taken
place on March 14. Canning ‘said, what he had told me before, that he
had received and rejected overtures from Lord Grenville.... He declared
with a threat that he never would sit in the same Cabinet as Addington.’

    [285] Sir William Drummond, born about 1770; died in 1828. He was
appointed Minister at the Court of Naples in 1801, and again in 1806,
and Ambassador to the Porte in 1803.

    [286] No action was taken in these matters owing to the fall of the
Ministry, and Canning allowed the question to lapse.

    [287] Alexander Hamilton, Marquess of Douglas (1767–1852), British
Ambassador at St. Petersburg. He succeeded his father as tenth Duke of
Hamilton in 1819.

    [288] He stated in a letter to Lord Holland, dated April 27, that he
wished to attach himself completely to the Prince.

    [289] Right Hon. Charles Bragge, who married Lord Sidmouth’s sister,
and took the additional surname of Bathurst in 1804. He sat in the
House of Commons 1790–1823, and died in 1831.

    [290] Philip, third Earl of Hardwicke (1757–1834), son of the
Right Hon. Charles Yorke. He succeeded his uncle in 1790, and was
Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland from 1801 to 1806.

    [291] Lord Hardwicke’s half-brother, Charles Philip Yorke (1764–1834).
He was Secretary at War, 1801–3; Home Secretary, 1803–4; and First Lord
of the Admiralty, 1810–11.

    [292] March 18.

    [293] Charles Manners-Sutton (1755–1828), raised to the See of
Canterbury in 1805, and father of Viscount Canterbury (for many years
Speaker of the House of Commons).

    [294] Lord Auckland was President of the Board of Trade. His letter is
printed in _Lord Auckland’s Journal and Correspondence_, iv. 300.

    [295] Charles William, Viscount Milton (1786–1857), only son of
William, fourth Earl Fitzwilliam, on whose death in 1833 Lord Milton
succeeded to the titles. He remained member for Yorkshire until 1831.

    [296] The figures were: Wilberforce 11,806, Milton 11,177, Lascelles
10,989, the two first being therefore returned. Wilberforce’s
expenses, after many of his supporters had paid their own, amounted
to 28,600_l._, while those of his opponents were reckoned to be
200,000_l._ (_Dictionary of Nat. Biog._).

    [297] Mary Elizabeth, born in 1806. She married, in 1830, Thomas
Atherton, third Baron Lilford, and died in 1891.

    [298] Peter Leopold Louis Francis Nassau, fifth Earl Cowper
(1778–1837), who succeeded his brother in 1799. He married, in 1805,
Amelia, daughter of Peniston, first Viscount Melbourne. After Lord
Cowper’s death she married Lord Palmerston in 1839.

    [299] The Hon. Sir Arthur Paget (1771–1840), second son of Henry, first
Earl of Uxbridge. He held various diplomatic posts, and was appointed,
in 1807, Ambassador to the Porte. He retired from the service two years
later.

    [300] David Richard Morier (1784–1877), son of Isaac Morier,
Consul-General of the Levant Company at Constantinople. Commencing at
the age of twenty, he held various diplomatic posts in the East, was
secretary to Lord Castlereagh at Châtillon, &c., and was for many years
Minister at Berne.

    [301] Mr. Adam brought a motion in the House of Commons on July 2,
1807, in defence of the warrant for a pension to the Scotch Judge,
Lord Cullen, of 400_l._ a year, with a reversion of 200_l._
for life to his wife. He argued that it was fair, if a judge was not
sufficiently well off to keep up his position. Lord Cullen was devoting
two-thirds of his income to pay his father’s debts.

    [302] It was burnt in 1831 by the mob, on account of the opposition of
its owner to the Reform Act.

    [303] ‘Conversation’ Sharp.

    [304] The _History of Brazil_ was the only part published.

    [305] George William, sixth Duke of Argyll (1766–1839), who succeeded
his father in 1806. He married, in 1810, Caroline Elizabeth, daughter
of George, fourth Earl of Jersey, and previously wife of the Earl of
Uxbridge (afterwards Marquess of Anglesey), whom she divorced.

    [306] Lord John Russell.

    [307] Lewis, describing this visit in a letter to his mother, says,
‘I happened to wake about six o’clock, and hearing the billiard balls
in motion, I put on my dressing-gown and went into the gallery, from
whence looking down into the great hall, I descried Tom Sheridan and
Mr. Chester (who had not been to bed all night) playing with great
eagerness. Fortunately, Tom was in the act of making a stroke on
which the fate of the whole game depended; when I shouted to him over
the balustrade, “Shame! Shame! A married man!” on which he started
back in a fright, missed his stroke, and lost the game’ (_Life and
Correspondence of M. G. Lewis_, ii. 5).

    [308] Hon. Henry Edward Fox (1802–59), afterwards fourth Lord Holland;
always a weakly child from birth. He was afflicted with a form of hip
disease, which gave him much trouble all his life.

    [309] Lord Holland says in the _Memoirs of the Whig Party_: ‘Mr.
Ponsonby was brought into Parliament at the beginning of the session
for the purpose of assuming an ascendency over a large, intelligent,
and independent body of gentlemen with scarcely twenty of whom he was
personally acquainted. A preposterous scheme!’

    [310] William Belsham (1752–1827), author of a series of works, which
he combined to form a _History of Great Britain to the Conclusion of
the Peace of Amiens_.

    [311] Napoleon’s insistence on one of the secret articles of the Treaty
of Tilsit, requiring Russia to close her ports against English vessels,
was the actual reason for the Czar’s declaration of war against
England. Lord Granville Leveson left St. Petersburg early in November
1807.

    [312] Prince Stahremberg was Austrian Minister in London. Lord Holland
states that he did not consider his information reliable except where
it was substantiated by documents. Metternich was Austrian Ambassador
at Paris. The declaration of war of both Austria and Prussia was
entirely due to Napoleon’s instigation, as one step in his campaign
against British commerce. Both countries had the sense to give no
reason for their action.

    [313] These letters, Mr. Fox asserted in a speech in the House of
Commons, were the origin of the rupture of the peace of Amiens.
Certainly they were the means of rousing Napoleon’s ire, for Coleridge
had to leave Rome in 1806 in all haste, after a friendly warning that
the Emperor intended his arrest. He was Secretary to the Governor of
Malta, Sir Alexander Ball, 1804–5, a post which was rather the result
of a chance visit to the island than an official appointment. He wrote
for the _Courier_ for several years at this period of his life.

    [314] George, second Lord Kenyon (1776–1855), who succeeded his father
in 1802. Lord Kenyon seconded the Address, but his speech was delivered
in so low a tone as to be inaudible below the bar (_Hansard_).

    [315] The British expedition to Copenhagen in September 1807, which
resulted in the seizure of the Danish fleet and the bombardment of that
city. Canning had private information of the secret clauses of the
Treaty between Napoleon and Alexander at Tilsit. His refusal to produce
papers which would incidentally have brought his secret agent to light,
coupled with what they considered his shabby behaviour in joining the
Tory Government, caused him much odium amongst the Whigs.

    [316] Milnes?

    [317] Mr. R. Campbell came over in the _Revenge_, man-of-war, with
the deputies who had arrived to ask for English assistance against the
French. Napoleon invaded Spain late in 1807, and set up his brother
Joseph on the throne. This was too much for the _amour propre_ of
the Spaniards; they rose in arms, and in every town occupied by the
invader outbreaks of the most ferocious description took place.

    [318] Solano was Governor of Cadiz. The French fleet consisted of five
ships of the line and one frigate, which had escaped to that port after
Trafalgar, and had lain there ever since. They were forced to surrender
a fortnight later to the Spaniards, as they were unable to leave the
harbour on account of Lord Collingwood’s fleet, which was waiting for
them outside.

    [319] Don Gonzalo O’Farrill (1754–1831), Spanish General, who sided
with Joseph Bonaparte, and became his War Minister.

    [320] At Madrid on May 2 Murat put a large number of people to death
without trial for supposed participation in riots which had taken place
there that day.

    [321] The French General, Count Pierre Dupont, who was in command of
the French forces in Andalusia. He was defeated by Castaños at Baylen
in July 1808, and forced to lay down his arms with 18,000 men.

    [322] The Duke of Infantado was implicated, as Lady Holland relates,
in the supposed plot of Ferdinand, Prince of the Asturias, against
his father, Charles IV, in October 1807. The whole conspiracy was
looked upon in many quarters as a device of Godoy’s to ruin his rival
Escoiquiz. The Duke accompanied Ferdinand to Bayonne the following
April, and after his master’s deposition offered his services to Joseph
Bonaparte. On the first favourable occasion, however, he turned against
him and was given a Spanish command.

    [323] The picture was painted in 1763, and is now at Mount Stuart, Lord
Bute’s residence in the Isle of Bute.

    [324] Second daughter of Alexander, Duke of Gordon, and sister of
Charlotte, fourth Duchess of Richmond.

    [325] At Baylen.

    [326] Afterwards better known as Count Torreno. He was a member of the
first Cortes at Cadiz, and had to leave Spain at Ferdinand’s return. He
lived in Paris until 1820, when he came back to Spain.

    [327] Manuel Freyne (1765–1834), general, who served with distinction
throughout the war. He refused employment under Ferdinand.

    [328] From Spain, where he went as Ambassador early in 1809. He
succeeded Canning as Foreign Secretary.

    [329] John, second Marquess of Lansdowne, previously referred to in
these pages as Lord Wycombe.

    [330] By a former family arrangement Lord Lansdowne was enabled, should
his brother die childless, to draw up a deed of appointment as to the
disposition of the property.

    [331] Georgina Anne, who died in 1819.

    [332] George, ninth Earl of Winchilsea, and fourth Earl of Nottingham
(1752–1826), who succeeded his uncle in 1769.

    [333] Joseph Berington (1746–1827), an Englishman educated at the
College of St. Omer. He became a priest, and was one of the first of
that persuasion to wear black clothes in England, from which others had
up to then refrained for fear of persecution. He was the author of a
number of works, historical and philosophical.

    [334] Canning’s statement was published in the papers on November 28.
It took the form of a letter to Lord Camden laying the blame on him for
the misunderstanding with Lord Castlereagh.

    [335] Lady Elizabeth Foster married William, fifth Duke of Devonshire,
on October 19, 1809.

    [336] For the Chancellorship of the University, rendered vacant by
the death of the Duke of Portland on October 30. Lord Grenville, Lord
Eldon, and the Duke of Beaufort were the rival candidates.

    [337] Martin Davy (1763–1839). He was elected Master of Caius in 1803,
and held that position until his death. He was a staunch Whig, and was
given a living near Cambridge in 1827.

    [338] A town in Portugal, one of the sights of which is a magnificent
cathedral.

    [339] Lady Anne Fitzpatrick, and her father, Lord Upper Ossory.

    [340] An amendment to the Address was moved in both Houses, deploring
the ill-success of the late expeditions, and demanding an inquiry into
the reasons of their failure. Creevey says in his journal (_Creevey
Papers_, i. 123): ‘Notwithstanding Tierney’s calculations and
prophecy that we should be in a majority, we were beat by ninety-six.’

    [341] The figures were 144 to 92, against the Amendment.

    [342] His motion was, ‘To appoint a Committee to inquire into the
policy and conduct of the late expedition to the Scheldt.’

    [343] William Frederick Eden, eldest son of William, first Lord
Auckland. He was born in 1782, and was, at the time of his death,
Deputy-Teller of the Exchequer.

    [344] Domingo Antonio de Souza, Marquis de Funchal (1765–1832),
Portuguese Ambassador in England.

    [345] William Windham died on June 4, 1810, from the effects of a
severe operation for a tumour on his hip. About a year before he had
sustained an injury from some falling woodwork, when engaged in trying
to save from fire a valuable library belonging to his friend the Hon.
Frederick North, and on this the disease fastened.

Windham’s father, Colonel Windham, married, after his first wife’s
death, Sarah Hicks, widow of Robert Lukin, of Dunmow. To a nephew by
this connection, Captain (afterwards Admiral) Lukin, Windham left his
property on condition he took the family name.

His diary was published by Mrs. Henry Baring in 1866.

    [346] As Chancellor of Oxford University.

    [347] Henrietta Elizabeth, eldest daughter of the Hon. Edward Bouverie.
She married, in 1790, James St. Clair Erskine, second Earl of Rosslyn.

    [348] John Clerk, of Eldin (1728–1812), seventh son of Sir John Clerk,
of Penicuik. He lived about six miles from Edinburgh. He was the author
of _An Essay on Naval Tactics_, which he claimed had much effect
on the warfare of the day.

    [349] Queen Mary’s remains were removed to Westminster in 1612.

    [350] Holland House.

    [351] General Fox was appointed Governor of Portsmouth in 1808, on his
return from Sicily, and died there three years later.

    [352] General Sir Ronald Craufurd Ferguson (1773–1841), son of William
Ferguson, of Raith. He saw much service, and sat for many years as a
Whig in the House of Commons. The appointment, which he was obliged to
relinquish at Cadiz, was that of second-in-command.

    [353] Charles Fox entered the Navy in 1809, but disliked the life so
much that he left in 1813, and entered the sister service two years
later.

    [354] The whole building was restored and remodelled by Street in 1866,
and now forms the garrison church.

    [355] Captain Graham Moore (1764–1843), afterwards Admiral Sir Graham
Moore, G.C.B., third son of Dr. John Moore. He was in command of the
English squadron which escorted the Regent of Portugal to Brazil, and
was for some years a Lord of the Admiralty.

    [356] James Moore (1763–1834), second son of Dr. John Moore. He was a
surgeon, and wrote two books on his brother’s life and campaign.

    [357] Dom John was appointed Regent of Portugal in 1799, on account of
his mother Queen Maria I.’s insanity. In conformance with Napoleon’s
orders he proclaimed in November 1807, that he was about to detain
all British subjects and property in Lisbon, upon which the British
Minister, Lord Strangford, at once went on board the fleet, and broke
off diplomatic relations. On consideration, however, the Regent
preferred to remain friendly with the English and move the Court to
Brazil; consequently Lord Strangford returned, but not till after the
Portuguese royal family had already embarked. This is the point here
insisted upon, for Lord Strangford was accused of inferring in his
despatch that the departure of the Court was chiefly due to his own
representations.

    [358] Mariano Luis Urquijo (1768–1817), Spanish statesman, who acted
in opposition to the Prince of the Peace and was imprisoned by him for
two years. After the detention of the Royal family, he gave up hope for
Spain, and sided with Joseph, with whom he fled to France.

    [359] Admiral Lord Amelius Beauclerk, G.C.B. (1771–1846), third son of
Aubrey, fifth Duke of St. Albans, and Catherine, daughter of William,
Earl of Bessborough.

    [360] Admiral Sir Roger Curtis, Bart. (1746–1816), naval
commander-in-chief at Portsmouth.

    [361] Ferdinand of Naples withdrew to Sicily in 1805, and there
established himself with his Court under British protection.

    [362] Lord Amherst was Commander-in-Chief in Sicily.

    [363] Attorney-General in Lord Grenville’s Administration.

    [364] The French army of 72,000 men under Masséna invaded Portugal
early in September. Wellington had only 50,000 men at his disposal;
half of whom were Portuguese. He retreated before the invaders, but
was able to deliver a severe check to their advance, at Busaco, on
September 27, with but little loss to his own force.

    [365] The critical state of the King’s mind was adversely affected by
the illness of Princess Amelia. After her death, on November 2, he
became permanently insane.

    [366] Yet Masséna represented to Napoleon some weeks later that the
frontal attack on the British position was only a feint, which had
developed from over-keenness into a general engagement. His dispatches,
however, captured after the action, made no mention of this fact (Sir
Herbert Maxwell’s _Life of Wellington_).

    [367] Afterwards Sir Thomas Tyrwhitt, and Black Rod.

    [368] George Ponsonby.

    [369] It is impossible to trace so extended an interpretation in the
report of the speech given in _Hansard_, though a veiled meaning
is possible in some of his carefully worded allusions to the royal
power.

    [370] The ordinary composition of the Cortes was a three-chamber
assembly consisting of clergy, nobility, and commons. The Central
Junta, in whom the power of calling together the Cortes rested,
decided that as a compromise with the extreme party of reform, only
two chambers (the higher clergy and nobility sitting together in one)
should be summoned to assemble early in March. The advance of the
French, however, postponed the meeting, and the supreme government
was placed in the hands of a Regency of five. These took good care to
keep the power as long as possible, and when the Cortes was at last
found necessary, only one chamber could be elected, and that within the
boundaries of Cadiz, for the French were almost at their gates. See
Appendix B, p. 297.

    [371] General Sir Robert Wilson (1777–1849), author of _The History
of the British Expedition to Egypt_. He served both in the British
army and in various continental corps. He was dismissed the service
in 1820 for his supposed conduct at Queen Caroline’s funeral, but was
reinstated by William IV.

His Lusitanian Legion was amalgamated with the Portuguese army during
its reorganisation.

General Drouet joined Masséna with the Ninth corps, forcing Wilson
across the Mondego, from fear of being surrounded.

    [372] Sir Robert’s affair at Puerto de Baños was an attempt to check
Ney, at the head of a large force, with a number of Spanish and
Portuguese levies. He lost a thousand men in the attempt.

    [373] Huskisson resigned his post at the Treasury in 1809, and followed
Canning into retirement. His pamphlet entitled ‘The Depreciation of the
Currency’ received much notice.

    [374] One of the gentlemen in attendance on the Prince of Wales. ‘That
warlike scaramouch Macmahon,’ of Peter Pindar. He died in 1817.

    [375] The Committee of the House of Lords was appointed by ballot, each
Peer having the right to send in a list of twenty-one names. That of
the House of Commons was named by the Chancellor of the Exchequer.

    [376] The report of the Bullion Committee, of which Horner was
President, was that paper issues were liable to depreciation unless
convertible at any time into money.

    [377] The appointment was not filled up till 1812, when Lord Hertford
accepted the post.

    [378] Gustavus IV. (1778–1837), who succeeded his father as King of
Sweden in 1792. His tactless and inconsequent behaviour so irritated
his people that they deposed him in 1809, and gave the crown to his
uncle. After leaving Sweden Gustavus lived chiefly in Switzerland.

    [379] Lucien Bonaparte’s second wife was Madame Jouberthon, the widow
of a stockbroker. He quarrelled with his brother over this marriage,
and after the Duc d’Enghien’s death went to Italy. He attempted to
reach America, but was captured by an English ship, and after a
detention at Malta, was brought to England. There he remained until
1814.

    [380] William, fourth Duke of Queensberry (1724–1810), the celebrated
courtier and _roué_, known as ‘Old Q.’ The larger portion of
his money was left to Lord and Lady Yarmouth, the latter being Maria
Fagniani, whom the Duke always considered was his daughter. George
Selwyn believed that this lady was his child and not the Duke’s, and
also left her money.

    [381] Henry, Duke of Buccleugh became fifth Duke of Queensberry; Sir
Charles Douglas, Marquess of Queensberry; and Lord Wemyss, Earl of
March.

    [382] The Duke of York had been compelled to resign this post in 1809,
owing to the scandalous charges brought against him by Mrs. Clarke.

    [383] See _Further Memoirs of the Whig Party_, p. 39.

    [384] Grenville.

    [385] Lord William Cavendish Bentinck (1774–1839), second son of
William Henry, third Duke of Portland, who saw much service in various
parts of the world and rose to the rank of major-general in 1808. He
was appointed Envoy and Commander-in-Chief in Sicily in 1811, and
for three years was practically governor of the island. His sudden
departure, after a stay of only ten days, had the desired effect of
alarming the Sicilian Court, which became much more amenable, after
his return, to the reforms he proposed to introduce. The King was
notoriously incapable of reigning, and the power was in the hands of
the Queen, who detested the English, and was intriguing with the French.

    [386] They were imprisoned for a protest against the illegal taxation
which was being enforced by the Court, but were released and recalled
in January 1812.

    [387] Hon. Frederick James Lamb (1782–1853), who was created Lord
Beauvale in 1839, and succeeded his brother as third and last Viscount
Melbourne in 1848.

    [388] Afterwards Admiral Sir George Cockburn (1772–1853). He took
Napoleon to St. Helena in 1815, and remained there for a year as
Governor until relieved by Sir Hudson Lowe.

The Commission was to attempt to mediate between Spain and her American
Colonies. The Cortes, however, proved intractable, and the expedition
returned to England in August 1812.

    [389] See _ante_, i. 130.


    Transcriber’s Notes:

    1. Obvious printers’, punctuation and spelling errors have
    been corrected silently.

    2. Where hyphenation is in doubt, it has been retained as
    in the original.

    3. Some hyphenated and non-hyphenated versions of the same
    words have been retained as in the original.

    4. Italics are shown as _xxx_.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 73280 ***